

v1ch2

Report of the PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION
on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident

Chapter II: Events Leading Up to
the Challenger Mission

[ 10 ] Preparations for the
launch of mission 51-L were not unusual, though they were complicated
by changes in the launch schedule. The sequence of complex,
interrelated steps involved in producing the detailed schedule and
supporting logistics necessary for a successful mission always
requires intense effort and close coordination.

Flight 51-L of the Challenger was originally
scheduled for July, 1985, but by the time the crew was assigned in
January, 1985, launch had been postponed to late November to
accommodate changes in payloads. The launch was subsequently delayed
further and finally rescheduled for late January, 1986.

After the series of payload changes, the
Challenger cargo included two satellites in the cargo bay and
equipment in the crew compartment for experiments that would be
carried out during the mission. The payloads flown on mission 51-L
are listed in this table:

Mission 51-L Payloads

Tracking and Data Relay Satellite-B

Spartan-Halley Satellite

Comet Halley Active Monitoring
Program

Fluid Dynamics Experiment

Phase Partitioning Experiment

Teacher in Space Project

Shuttle Student Involvement Program

Radiation Monitoring Experiment

The primary payloads were the Tracking and
Data Relay Satellite (a NASA communications satellite) and the
Spartan satellite that would be deployed into orbit carrying special
instruments for the observation of Halley's Comet.

The NASA communications satellite was to have
been placed in a geosynchronous orbit with the aid of a booster
called the Inertial Upper Stage. The satellite would have supported
communications with the Space Shuttle and up to 23 other
spacecraft.

The Spartan satellite was to have been
deployed into low Earth orbit using the remote manipulator system.
The Spartan instruments would have watched Halley's Comet when it was
too close to the Sun for other observatories to do so. Subsequently,
the satellite would have been retrieved and returned to Earth in the
Shuttle payload bay.

Crew Assignments

On January 27, 1985, one year before launch,
NASA announced the names of the astronauts assigned to mission
51-L:

Commander

Francis R. Scobee

Pilot

Michael J. Smith

Mission Specialist One

Ellison S. Onizuka

Mission Specialist Two

Judith A. Resnik

Mission Specialist Three

Ronald E. McNair

The mission commander, Francis R. (Dick)
Scobee, first flew on the Space Shuttle as the pilot of mission 41-C
in April, 1984. Mr. Scobee, a native of Auburn, Washington, received
his bachelor's degree in aerospace engineering from the University of
Arizona. A former Air Force....

[ 11 ]

Space Shuttle 51-L on Pad 39-B of
Kennedy Space Center's launch complex.

[ 12 ] ...test pilot with
7,000 hours in 45 aircraft types, he became an astronaut in
1978.

The mission pilot, Captain Michael J. Smith,
USN, was on his first Shuttle flight after being selected as an
astronaut in 1980. A native of Beaufort, North Carolina, Captain
Smith, a 1967 graduate of the United States Naval Academy, received a
master's degree from the Naval Postgraduate School. He was a Navy
test pilot with extensive experience in a variety of aircraft.

Mission specialist Lieutenant Colonel Ellison
S. Onizuka, USAF, from Kealakekua, Kona, Hawaii, received his
master's degree in aerospace engineering at the University of
Colorado. A flight test engineer in the Air Force, he became an
astronaut in 1978 and flew on the first military mission (51-C) in
January, 1985, aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery

Mission specialist Judith A. Resnik, Ph.D.,
flew on the first flight of the Orbiter Discovery on mission 41-D in
August, 1984. Born in Akron, Ohio, Dr. Resnik received her doctorate
in electrical engineering from the University of Maryland in 1976.
After working for several industrial firms, she became an astronaut
in 1978.

Mission specialist Ronald E. McNair, Ph.D., a
native of Lake City, South Carolina, received his doctorate in
physics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1976. After
working as a research physicist in civilian industry, he...

Diagram shows the scheduling of
various preparatory milestones in the months that preceded the
launching of the Mission 51-L Shuttle.

[ 13 ] ....became an
astronaut in 1978 and first flew on mission 41-B in February, 1984,
aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger.

Payload specialists are members of a Space
Shuttle crew who are not career astronauts. Two such specialists,
Christa McAuliffe and Gregory B. Jarvis, were added to the crew of
mission 51 -L.

Ms. McAuliffe was born in Boston and raised in
Framingham, Massachusetts, where she graduated from Framingham State
College. After teaching a variety of junior high and high school
subjects in Maryland and New Hamphire, she was selected as the
Teacher in Space. She was assigned to the 51-L crew in July,
1985.

Mr. Jarvis was a former Air Force engineer who
specialized in satellite design. He was born in Detroit, Michigan,
and received his master's degree in electrical engineering from
Northeastern University in Boston. He was assigned to the 51-L crew
in October, 1985, as a representative of the Hughes Aircraft
Company.

The payload specialists each had
responsibilities for mission 51-L. Ms. McAuliffe was to conduct a
series of classroom lessons from orbit and conduct several basic
classroom experiments. Mr. Jarvis was to perform a series of fluid
dynamics experiments that would support satellite redesign.

Preparations for Flight

Planning for mission 51-L began in 1984, but
10 major change documents adding or deleting payload items caused
some disruption in the preparation process. Because the 12- to
18-month process is a series of repetitive cycles that define a
flight design in progressively more specific detail, significant
changes can require extensive time and effort to incorporate. The
closer to the planned launch date the changes occur, the more
difficult and disruptive it becomes to repeat the cycles necessary to
complete a mission plan. (See the Mission 51-L Milestone Summary
chart.) Although there were several significant changes to the cargo
manifest, most occurred early enough in the planning cycle to
minimize their impact on the flight preparation.

The cargo integration review is one of the
crucial coordination meetings in the flight preparation process. At
that meeting, requirements for all payloads are examined to ensure
that, collectively, they are within the capabilities of the vehicle
and crew.

For mission 51-L, the cargo integration review
was rescheduled six times, primarily because of payload changes. All
major payload changes were made, however, before the review
eventually took place on June 18, 1985, seven months before the
launch. Until the cargo integration review for a mission is
completed, the development of the final flight design products cannot
really get underway. Because the mission 51-L payload changes were
made before the cargo integration review, however, changes to the
manifest did not seriously disrupt the preparation cycle.

Once the principal payload items were
determined and the cargo integration review was completed, the flight
design process became relatively straightforward. The flight design
process is the central element in flight preparation. The process
transforms the broad objectives of the flight into a detailed
sequence of events from launch to landing. For mission 51 -L, the
objectives consisted of placing one satellite in orbit, deploying and
retrieving Spartan, and conducting the six experiments. From that
base, the flight design process produced a detailed schedule of
events, trajectory data, requirements for consumable items,
communications requirements and the necessary computer programing for
the Orbiter, the Mission Control Center, and the Shuttle simulator
used to train the crew for this particular mission.

The launch minus five months Flight Planning
and Stowage Review was conducted on August 20, 1985, to address any
unresolved issues and any changes to the plan that had developed to
that point. Ideally, the mission events are firmly determined before
the review takes place. For mission 51-L, however, Mr. Jarvis was not
added to the crew until October 25, 1985, and his activities could
not be incorporated into mission planning until that time. The crew
activity plan, the formal flight requirements and the flight design
status were reviewed as well as the current status of the engineering
integration, the photo and TV requirements, and crew compartment
stowage. The Flight Planning and Stowage Review did identify the need
for further consideration of the launch window and of the then
undefined requirements for the Teacher-in-Space program.

There were changes to middeck payloads,
resulting from the addition of Mr. Jarvis, that occurred less than
three months before launch. The most negative result of the changes
was a [ 14 ] delay in publishing the crew activity plan. The crew
activity plan specifies the in-flight schedule for all crew members,
which in turn affects other aspects of flight preparation. Because
the NASA communications satellite training requirements were quite
similar to those for a previous flight, the crew training began using
that existing crew activity plan and associated checklists.
Considerable time was saved as a result. The requirements unique to
Spartan did not involve major departures from the standard satellite
deployment and rendezvous techniques that had been developed on
mission 51-G, the experiment packages did not require any new Orbiter
procedures, and the ascent and entry techniques were standard. Thus,
mission 51-L did not involve radical departures from previous flight
patterns.

The crew began training 3 7 weeks before
launch. Preparation in the Shuttle Mission Simulator, a fully
instrumented mock-up of the Shuttle interior, began at launch minus
36 weeks. Integrated training in the simulator, which allows the crew
to train with the flight controllers who will be controlling the
flight in both the Mission Control Center and remote centers, began
at launch minus nine weeks. For the crew, Shuttle simulator training
included preparation for the use of the robot arm, a rendezvous in
space, Inertial Upper Stage deployment, ascent and entry procedures,
and a variety of other activities.....

Graph compares training workloads of
crews for six Shuttle missions in the nine weeks that preceded the
launching of the space flights.

[ 15 ] ....that must be
practiced repeatedly if a Shuttle mission is to be carried out
successfully.

All NASA crew members exceeded the number of
training hours required and were certified proficient in all mission
tasks. The two payload specialists also fulfilled their training
requirements. All mission 51 -L astronauts and flight controllers
were certified ready for flight.

From a flight design process point of view,
mission 51-L was a fairly typical mission. The most noticeable effect
of the delays in the production process was a delay in the start of
Shuttle Mission Simulator training specific to the flight. That
training began at launch minus nine weeks for the crew of 51-L, two
weeks later than the original schedule required.

Compressed training time was becoming a
concern in late 1985. The crew of mission 51-L trained for an average
of 48.7 hours per week during those nine weeks before launch, with
peaks reaching 65 to 70 hours per week. Much more compression in
their training schedule would not have been possible. (See the Crew
Workload Comparisons graph.)

Launch date delays for mission 61-C also
became a scheduling factor for the integrated simulations for mission
51-L. Originally scheduled for the third week in December, the 61-C
launch was delayed until January 12, 1986. During the last six weeks
before the Challenger launch, the 51-L schedule was changed several
times as a result of launch delays of 61-C. The final impact on the
Challenger crew training was reduced spacing between the ascent and
entry simulations during the last two weeks before launch, but no
training time was lost.

Flight Readiness Review

The Level I Flight Readiness Review for
mission 51-L took place on January 15, 1986. The Flight Readiness
Review should address all aspects of flight preparation about which
any questions have arisen. In addition, attendees confirm that all
equipment and operational plans have been certified ready by the
responsible manager within NASA. Solid Rocket Booster joints were not
discussed during the review on January 15.

The period during the day when a particular
flight can be launched is determined by the requirements of the
Orbiter and the payloads. The launch period for mission 51-L was
limited in order to provide the best lighting conditions for
Spartan's observations of Halley's Comet. The resulting «launch
window" was a topic of some discussion at the Flight Readiness
Review. The Challenger launch originally had been scheduled for a
morning lift off. When Spartan was added to the mission, the launch
window was changed to the afternoon. This change would have required
a landing at night if a transatlantic abort landing had become
necessary. Because the alternate transatlantic site, Casablanca, was
not equipped for a night landing, the afternoon launch eliminated
that back-up site. As January drew to a close, however, the
conditions for optimum telescopic viewing of the comet could not be
met. The launch window was shifted back to the morning hours so that
the transatlantic abort site would be in daylight and a back-up site
(Casablanca) would be available.

The results of the flight design process were
summarized at the Flight Readiness Review. The predicted ascent
performance, including expected trajectory, main engine throttling
profile, expected dynamic pressure and the amount of propellant
reserve expected at main engine cutoff, were presented and discussed.
The expected landing parameters, weight and center of gravity figures
were also presented for a variety of contingencies. It should be
noted that a waiver was required because the weight of the Orbiter
exceeded the allowable limits for an abort landing. The flight design
data presented at the Flight Readiness Review are available in the
Appendix in the NASA Mission Planning and Operations Team Report. No
outstanding concerns were identified in the discussion of flight
design.

The detailed flight plan and schedule of crew
activities also were presented at the Flight Readiness Review. The
Challenger was to circle the Earth for six days at an orbital
altitude of approximately 153 nautical miles, landing early on the
seventh day at Kennedy in Florida.

The major activities were to include
deployment of the tracking and data relay satellite 10 hours after
launch, deployment of the Spartan satellite on the third day of the
flight and subsequent retrieval of the Spartan two days later. A
summary of the planned activities is provided in the table that
follows.

[ 16 ] Mission 51-L Orbital Activity Schedule

Day One

After arriving in orbit, the crew had
two periods of scheduled high activity. First, they were to
check the readiness of the NASA satellite prior to planned
deployment. After a lunch break, they were to deploy the
satellite and Inertial Upper Stage and to perform a series
of separation maneuvers. The first sleep period was
scheduled to be eight hours long starting about 18 hours
after crew wake-up on launch morning.

Day Two

The Comet Halley Active Monitoring
Program experiment was scheduled to begin on the second day.
Also scheduled were the initial teacher-in-space video
taping and a firing of the orbital maneuvering engines to
place the Orbiter at the 1 52-mile orbital altitude from
which the Spartan would be deployed.

Day Three

The third day was to start with the
crew programing the Spartan satellite with data sent from
Johnson. The satellite was to be deployed using the remote
manipulator system (the robot arm), and then the Orbiter
would be maneuvered to produce, by day four, a 90-mile
separation from Spartan.

Day Four

The Orbiter was to begin closing on
Spartan while Jarvis continued the fluid dynamics
experiments started on day two and day three. In addition,
two lessons telecast live were to be conducted by Ms.
McAuliffe.

Day Five

After rendezvous with Spartan, the
crew was to use the robot arm to capture the satellite and
re-stow it in the payload bay.

Day Six

Entry preparations were to dominate
the last full day in space: flight control system checks,
test firing of maneuvering jets needed for entry, and cabin
stowage. A crew news conference also was scheduled following
the lunch period, if requested by the NASA Public Affairs
Office.

Day Seven

The seventh day would have been spent
preparing the Space Shuttle for deorbit and entry into the
atmosphere. The Challenger was scheduled to land at Kennedy
144 hours and 34 minutes after launch.

[ 17 ] Launch Delays

The launch of mission 51-L was postponed three
times and scrubbed once from the planned date of January 22, 1986.
The first postponement was announced on December 23, 1985. That
change established the launch date as January 23, 1986, in order to
accommodate the final integrated simulation schedule that resulted
from the slip in the launch date of mission 61-C.

On January 22, 1986, the Program Requirements
Change Board first slipped the launch from January 23 to January 25.
That date subsequently was changed to January 26, 1986, primarily
because of Kennedy work requirements produced by the late launch of
mission 61-C.

The third postponement of the launch date
occurred during an evening management conference on January 25, 1986,
to review the weather forecast for the Kennedy area. Because the
forecast was for unacceptable weather throughout the launch window on
January 26, early countdown activities that had already started were
terminated.

The launch attempt of January 27 began the day
before as the complex sequence of events leading to lift off
commenced. Fueling of the External Tank began at 12:30 a.m. Eastern
Standard Time. The crew was awakened at 05:07 a.m., and events
proceeded normally with the crew strapped into the Shuttle at 07:56
a.m. At 09: 10, however, the countdown was halted when the ground
crew reported a problem with an exterior hatch handle. By the time
the hatch handle problem was solved at 10:30 a.m., winds at the
Kennedy runway designated for a return-to-launchsite abort had
increased and exceeded the allowable velocity for crosswinds. The
launch attempt for January 27 was canceled at 12:35 p.m. Eastern
Standard Time; the Challenger countdown was rescheduled for January
28.

The weather was forecast to be clear and very
cold, with temperatures dropping into the low twenties overnight. The
management team directed engineers to assess the possible effects of
temperature on the launch. No critical issues were identified to
management officials, and while evaluation continued, it was decided
to proceed with the countdown and the fueling of the External
Tank.

Ice had accumulated in the launch pad area
during the night and it caused considerable concern for the launch
team. In reaction, the ice inspection team was sent to the launch pad
at 01:35 a.m., January 28, and returned to the Launch Control Center
at 03:00 a.m. After a meeting to consider the team's report, the
Space Shuttle program manager decided to continue the countdown.
Another ice inspection was scheduled at launch minus three
hours.

Also, during the night, prior to fueling, a
problem developed with a fire detector in the ground liquid hydrogen
storage tank. Though it was ultimately tracked to a hardware fault
and repaired, fueling was delayed by two and one-half hours. By
continuing past a planned hold at launch minus three hours, however,
the launch delay was reduced to one hour. Crew wake-up was
rescheduled for 06:18 a.m., January 28, but by that time the crew was
already up.

Because of forecast rain and low ceilings at
Casablanca, the alternate abort site, that site was declared a"no-go"
at 07:30 a.m. The change had no mission impact, however, because the
weather at the primary transatlantic abort landing site at Dakar,
Senegal, was acceptable. The abort-once-around site was Edwards Air
Force Base, California.

With an extra hour, the crew had more than
sufficient time to eat breakfast, get a weather briefing and put on
flight gear. At the weather briefing, the temperature and ice on the
pad were discussed, but neither then nor in earlier weather
discussions was the crew told of any concern about the effects of low
temperature on the Shuttle System. The seven crew members left the
crew quarters and rode the astronaut van to launch pad B, arriving at
08:03. They were in their seats in the Challenger at 08:36
a.m.

At 08:44 a.m. the ice team completed its
second inspection. After hearing the team's report, the program
manager decided to allow additional time for ice to melt on the pad.
He also decided to send the ice team to perform one final ice
assessment at launch minus 20 minutes. When the count was resumed,
launch had been delayed a second hour beyond the original lift off
time of 09:38 a.m., Eastern Standard Time.

At 11: 15 the ice inspection was completed,
and during the hold at launch minus nine minutes, the mission 51-L
crew and all members of the launch team gave their "go" for launch.
The final flight of the Challenger began at 11:38:00.010 a.m.,
Eastern Standard Time, January 28, 1986.

[ 18 ]
The Flight of the
Challenger

The events that followed lift
off were brief:

Launch Time

Event

.

- 6.6 sec.

Space Shuttle engines ignition

O sec.

Solid Rocket Booster ignition

+ 7 sec.

"Roll program." (Challenger)

"Roger, roll, Challenger."
(Houston)

+ 24 sec.

Main engines throttled down to
94%

+ 42 sec.

Main engines throttled down to
65%

+ 59 sec.

Main engines throttled up to
104%

+ 65 sec.

"Challenger, go at throttle
up."

(Houston) "Roger. Go at throttle up."
(Challenger)

+ 73 sec.

Loss of signal from Challenger

From lift off until the signal from the
Shuttle was lost, no flight controller observed any indication of a
problem. The Shuttle's main engines throttled down to limit the
maximum dynamic pressure, then throttled up to full thrust as
expected. Voice communications with the crew were normal. The crew
called to indicate the Shuttle had begun its roll to head due east
and to establish communication after launch. Fifty-seven seconds
later, Mission Control informed the crew that the engines had
successfully throttled up and all other systems were satisfactory.
The commander's acknowledgment of this call was the last voice
communication from the Challenger.

There were no alarms sounded in the cockpit.
The crew apparently had no indication of a problem before the rapid
break-up of the Space Shuttle system. The first evidence of an
accident came from live video coverage. Radar then began to track
multiple objects. The flight dynamics officer in Houston confirmed to
the flight director that "RSO [range safety officer] reports vehicle
exploded," and 30 seconds later he added that the range safety
officer had sent the destruct signal to the Solid Rocket
Boosters.

During the period of the flight when the Solid
Rocket Boosters are thrusting, there are no survivable abort options.
There was nothing that either the crew or the ground controllers
could have done to avert the catastrophe. .

