

v1ch8

Report of the PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION
on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident

Chapter VIII: Pressures on the
System.

[ 164 ] With the 1982
completion of the orbital flight test series, NASA began a planned
acceleration of the Space Shuttle launch schedule. One early plan
contemplated an eventual rate of a mission a week, but realism forced
several downward revisions. In 1985, NASA published a projection
calling for an annual rate of 24 flights by 1990. Long before the
Challenger accident, however, it was becoming obvious that even the
modified goal of two flights a month was overambitious.

In establishing the schedule, NASA had not
provided adequate resources for its attainment. As a result, the
capabilities of the system were strained by the modest nine-mission
rate of 1985, and the evidence suggests that NASA would not have been
able to accomplish the 15 flights scheduled for 1986. These are the
major conclusions of a Commission examination of the pressures and
problems attendant upon the accelerated launch schedule.

On the same day that the initial orbital tests
concluded-July 4, 1982-President Reagan announced a national policy
to set the direction of the U. S. space program during the following
decade. As part of that policy, the President stated that:

"The United States Space
Transportation System (STS) is the primary space launch system for
both national security and civil government missions."

Additionally, he said:

"The first priority of the STS
program is to make the system fully operational and cost-effective in
providing routine access to space."

From the inception of the Shuttle, NASA had
been advertising a vehicle that would make space operations "routine
and economical." The greater the annual number of flights, the
greater the degree of routinization and economy, so heavy emphasis
was placed on the schedule. However, the attempt to build up to 24
missions a year brought a number of difficulties, among them the
compression of training schedules, the lack of spare parts, and the
focusing of resources on nearterm problems.

One effect of NASA's accelerated flight rate
and the agency's determination to meet it was the dilution of the
human and material resources that could be applied to any particular
flight.

The part of the system responsible for turning
the mission requirements and objectives into flight software, flight
trajectory information and crew training materials was struggling to
keep up with the flight rate in late 1985, and forecasts showed it
would be unable to meet its milestones for 1986. It was falling
behind because its resources were strained to the limit, strained by
the flight rate itself and by the constant changes it was forced to
respond to within that accelerating schedule. Compounding the problem
was the fact that NASA had difficulty evolving from its singleflight
focus to a system that could efficiently support the projected flight
rate. It was slow in developing a hardware maintenance plan for its
reusable fleet and slow in developing the capabilities that would
allow it to handle the higher volume of work and training associated
with the increased flight frequency.

[ 165 ] Pressures developed
because of the need to meet customer commitments, which translated
into a requirement to launch a certain number of flights per year and
to launch them on time. Such considerations may occasionally have
obscured engineering concerns. Managers may have forgotten-partly
because of past success, partly because of their own well-nurtured
image of the program-that the Shuttle was still in a research and
development phase. In his testimony before a U.S. Senate
Appropriations subcommittee on May 5, 1982, following the third
flight of the Space Shuttle, James Beggs, then the NASA
Administrator, expressed NASA's commitment:

"The highest priority we have set
for NASA is to complete development of the Shuttle and turn it into
an operational system. Safety and reliability of flight and the
control of operational costs are primary objectives as we move
forward with the Shuttle program." 1

Sixteen months later, arguing in support of
the Space Station, Mr. Beggs said, "We can start anytime.... There's
no compelling reason [why] it has to be 1985 rather than '86 or '87.
The point that we have made is that the Shuttle is now operational."
2 The prevalent attitude in the program appeared to be
that the Shuttle should be ready to emerge from the developmental
stage, and managers were determined to prove it "operational."

Various aspects of the mission design and
development process were directly affected by that determination. The
sections that follow will discuss the pressures exerted on the system
by the flight rate, the reluctance to relax the optimistic schedule,
and the attempt to assume an operational status.

Planning of a Mission

The planning and preparation for a Space
Shuttle flight require close coordination among those making the
flight manifest, those designing the flight and the customers
contracting NASA's services. The goals are to establish the manifest;
define the objectives, constraints and capabilities of the mission;
and translate those into hardware, software and flight
procedures.

There are major program decision points in the
development of every Shuttle flight. At each of these points,
sometimes called freeze points, decisions are made that form the
basis for further engineering and product development. The
disciplines affected by these freeze points include integration
hardware, engineering, crew timeline, flight design and crew
training.

The first major freeze point is at launch
minus 15 months. At that time the flight is officially defined: the
launch date, Orbiter and major payloads are all specified, and
initial design and engineering are begun based on this
information.

The second major freeze point is at launch
minus 7.7 months, the cargo integration review. During this review,
the integration hardware design, Orbiter vehicle configuration,
flight design and software requirements are agreed to and specified.
Further design and engineering can then proceed.

Another major freeze point is the flight
planning and stowage review at launch minus five months. At that
time, the crew activity timeline and the crew compartment
configuration, which includes middeck payloads and payload specialist
assignments, are established. Final design, engineering and training
are based on these products.

Development of Flight Products

The "production process" begins by collecting
all mission objectives, requirements and constraints specified by the
payload and Space Shuttle communities at the milestones described
above. That information is interpreted and assimilated as various
groups generate products required for a Space Shuttle flight:
trajectory data, consumables requirements, Orbiter flight software,
Mission Control Center software and the crew activity plan, to name
just a few.

Some of these activities can be done in
parallel, but many are serial. Once a particular process has started,
if a substantial change is made to the flight, not only does that
process have to be started again, but the process that preceded it
and supplied its data may also need to be repeated. If one group
fails to meet its due date, the group that is next in the chain will
start late. The delay then cascades through the system.

Were the elements of the system meeting their
schedules? Although each group believed it had an adequate amount of
time allotted to perform its function, the system as a whole was
falling....

[ 166 ]

Graph depicts beginning of simulator
training for Shuttle crews in days before launch for missions 41-B
through 61-E.

....behind. An assessment of the system's
overall performance is best made by studying the process at the end
of the production chain: crew training. Analysis of training
schedules for previous flights and projected training schedules for
flights in the spring and summer of 1986 reveals a clear trend: less
and less time was going to be available for crew members to
accomplish their required training. (See the Shuttle mission
simulator training chart.)

The production system was disrupted by several
factors including increased flight rate, lack of efficient production
processing and manifest changes.

Changes in the Manifest

Each process in the production cycle is based
on information agreed upon at one of the freeze points. If that
information is later changed, the process may have to be repeated.
The change could be a change in manifest or a change to the Orbiter
hardware or software. The hardware and software changes in 1985
usually were mandatory changes; perhaps some of the manifest changes
were not.

The changes in the manifest were caused by
factors that fall into four general categories: hardware problems,
customer requests, operational [ 167 ] constraints and
external factors. The significant changes made in 1985 are shown in
the accompanying table. The following examples illustrate that a
single proposed change can have extensive impact, not because the
change itself is particularly difficult to accommodate (though it may
be), but because each change necessitates four or five other changes.
The cumulative effect can be substantial. (See the Impact of Manifest
Changes chart.)

When a change occurs, the program must choose
a response and accept the consequences of that response. The options
are usually either to maximize the benefit to the customer or to
minimize the adverse impact on Space Shuttle operations. If the first
option is selected, the consequences will include short-term and/or
longterm effects.

Hardware problems can cause extensive changes
in the payload manifest. The 51-E mission was on the launch pad, only
days from launch, with a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite and
Telesat satellite in the cargo bay, when a hardware problem in the
tracking satellite was discovered. That flight was canceled and the
payload reassigned. The cancellation resulted in major changes to
several succeeding flights. Mission 51 -D, scheduled to fly two
months later, was changed to add the Telesat and delete the retrieval
of the Long Duration Exposure Facility. The retrieval mission was
then added to mission 61-I, replacing another satellite. A new
mission (61-M) was scheduled for July, 1986, to accommodate the
Tracking and Data Relay Satellite and the displaced satellite, and
all flights scheduled later in 1986 slipped to make room for
61-M.

Customers occasionally have notified NASA
Headquarters of a desire to change their scheduled launch date
because of development problems, financial difficulties or changing
market conditions. NASA generally accedes to these requests and has
never imposed the penalties available. An example is the request made
to delay the flight of the Westar satellite from mission 61-C
(December, 1985) to a flight in March, 1986. Westar was added to
flight 61-E, and the Getaway Special bridge assembly was removed to
make room for it; the HS-376 satellite slot was deleted from 51-L and
added to 61-C; the Spartan-Halley satellite was deleted from 61-D and
added to 51 -L. Thus, four flights experienced major payload changes
as a result of one customer's request.

1985 Changes in the Manifest

Hardware Problems

Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (canceled 51
-E, added 61 -M).

Synchronous Communication Satellite (added to
61-C).

Synchronous Communication Satellite (removed
from 61-C).

OV- 102 late delivery from Palmdale (changed
to 51 -G, 51 -I, and 61 -A).

Customer Requests

HS-376 (removed from 51-I). G-Star (removed
from 61-C). Satellite Television Corporation-Direct Broadcast
Satellite (removed from 61-E).

Westar (removed from 61-C).

Satellite Television Corporation-Direct
Broadcast Satellite (removed from 61-H).

Electrophoresis Operations in Space (removed
from 61-B).

Electrophoresis Operations in Space (removed
from 61-H).

Hubble Space Telescope (swap with Earth
Observation Mission).

Operational Constraints

No launch window for Skynet/Indian Satellite
Combination (61-H).

Unacceptable structural loads for Tracking and
Data Relay Satellite/Indian Satellite (61-H).

Landing weight above allowable limits for each
of the following missions: 61-A, 61-E, 71-A, 61 -K.

External Factors

Late addition of SenatorJake Garn (A-Utah) (51
-D)

Late addition of Representative Bill Nelson
(D-Florida) (61-C).

Late addition of Physical Vapor Transport
Organic Solid experiment (51-I).

[ 168 ]

Graph shows that changes to the
payload manifest for Shuttle missions can boost Johnson Space Center
workload as much as 130 percent.

Operational constraints (for example, a
constraint on the total cargo weight) are imposed to insure that the
combination of payloads does not exceed the Orbiter's capabilities.
An example involving the Earth Observation Mission Spacelab flight is
presented in the NASA Mission Planning and Operations Team Report in
Appendix J. That case illustrates that changes resulting from a
single instance of a weight constraint violation can cascade through
the entire schedule.

External factors have been the cause of a
number of changes in the manifest as well. The changes discussed
above involve major payloads, but changes to other payloads or to
payload specialists can create problems as well. One small change
does not come alone; it generates several others. A payload
specialist was added to mission 61-C only two months before its
scheduled lift off. Because there were already seven crew members
assigned to the flight, one had to be removed. The Hughes payload
specialist was moved from 61-C to 51-L just three months before 51-L
was scheduled to launch. His experiments were also added to 51-L. Two
middeck experiments were deleted from 51-L as a result, and the
deleted experiments would have reappeared on later flights.

[ 169 ]

Graph depicts beginning of simulator
training for Shuttle crews in days before launch for missions 51-L
through 61-K. Launch minus 77 days is normal training date
start.

Again, a "single" late change affected at
least two flights very late in the planning and preparation
cycles.

The effects of such changes in terms of
budget, cost and manpower can be significant. In some cases, the
allocation of additional resources allows the change to be
accommodated with little or no impact to the overall schedule. In
those cases, steps that need to be re-done can still be accomplished
before their deadlines. The amount of additional resources required
depends, of course, on the magnitude of the change and when the
change occurs: early changes, those before the cargo integration
review, have only a minimal impact; changes at launch minus five
months (two months after the cargo integration review) can carry a
major impact, increasing the required resources by approximately 30
percent. In the missions from 41-C to 51-L, only 60 percent of the
major changes occurred before the cargo integration review. More than
20 percent occurred after launch minus five months and caused
disruptive budget and manpower impacts. 3

Engineering flight products are generated
under a contract that allows for increased expenditures to meet
occasional high workloads.

[ 170 ] Even with this
built-in flexibility, however, the requested changes occasionally
saturate facilities and personnel capabilities. The strain on
resources can be tremendous. For short periods of two to three months
in mid-1985 and early 1986, facilities and personnel were being
required to perform at roughly twice the budgeted flight rate.

If a change occurs late enough, it will have
an impact on the serial processes. In these cases, additional
resources will not alleviate the problem, and the effect of the
change is absorbed by all downstream processes, and ultimately by the
last element in the chain. In the case of the flight design and
software reconfiguration process, that last element is crew training.
In January, 1986, the forecasts indicated that crews on flights after
51-I. would have significantly less time than desired to train for
their flights. 4 (See the Simulation Training chart.)

According to Astronaut Henry
Hartsfield:

"Had we not had the accident, we
were going to be up against a wall; STS 61-H . . . would have had to
average 31 hours in the simulator to accomplish their required
training, and STS 61-K would have to average 33 hours. That is
ridiculous. For the first time, somebody was going to have to stand
up and say we have got to slip the launch because we are not going to
have the crew trained." 5

"Operational" Capabilities

For a long time during Shuttle development,
the program focused on a single flight, the first Space Shuttle
mission. When the program became "operational," flights came more
frequently, and the same resources that had been applied to one
flight had to be applied to several flights concurrently.
Accomplishing the more pressing immediate requirements diverted
attention from what was happening to the system as a whole. That
appears to be one of the many telling differences between a "research
and development" program and an "operational program." Some of the
differences are philosophical, some are attitudinal and some are
practical.

Elements within the Shuttle program tried to
adapt their philosophy, their attitude and their requirements to the
"operational era." But that era came suddenly, and in some cases,
there had not been enough preparation for what "operational" might
entail. For example, routine and regular post-flight maintenance and
inspections are critical in an operational program; spare parts arc
critical to flight readiness in an operational fleet; and the
software tools and training facilities developed during a test
program may not be suitable for the high volume of work required in
an operational environment. In many respects, the system was not
prepared to meet an "operational" schedule.

As the Space Shuttle system matured, with
numerous changes and compromises, a comprehensive set of requirements
was developed to ensure the success of a mission. What evolved was a
system in which the preflight processing, flight planning, flight
control and flight training were accomplished with extreme care
applied to every detail. This process checked and rechecked
everything, and though it was both labor- and time-intensive, it was
appropriate and necessary for a system still in the developmental
phase. This process, however, was not capable of meeting the flight
rate goals.

After the first series of flights, the system
developed plans to accomplish what was required to support the flight
rate. The challenge was to streamline the processes through
automation, standardization, and centralized management, and to
convert from the developmental phase to the mature system without a
compromise in quality. It required that experts carefully analyze
their areas to determine what could be standardized and automated,
then take the time to do it.

But the increasing flight rate had priority-
quality products had to be ready on time. Further, schedules and
budgets for developing the needed facility improvements were not
adequate. Only the time and resources left after supporting the
flight schedule could be directed toward efforts to streamline and
standardize. In 1985, NASA was attempting to develop the capabilities
of a production system. But it was forced to do that while
responding-with the same personnel-to a higher flight rate.

At the same time the flight rate was
increasing, a variety of factors reduced the number of skilled
personnel available to deal with it. These included retirements,
hiring freezes, transfers to other programs like the Space Station
and transitioning to a single contractor for operations
support.

[ 171 ] The flight rate did
not appear to be based on assessment of available resources and
capabilities and was not reduced to accommodate the capacity of the
work force. For example, on January 1, 1986, a new contract took
effect at Johnson that consolidated the entire contractor work force
under a single company. This transition was another disturbance at a
time when the work force needed to be performing at full capacity to
meet the 1986 flight rate. In some important areas, a significant
fraction of workers elected not to change contractors. This reduced
the work force and its capabilities, and necessitated intensive
training programs to qualify the new personnel. According to
projections, the work force would not have been back to full capacity
until the summer of 1986. This drain on a critical part of the system
came just as NASA was beginning the most challenging phase of its
flight schedule. 6

Similarly, at Kennedy the capabilities of the
Shuttle processing and facilities support work force became
increasingly strained as the Orbiter turnaround time decreased to
accommodate the accelerated launch schedule. This factor has resulted
in overtime percentages of almost 28 percent in some directorates.
Numerous contract employees have worked 72 hours per week or longer
and frequent 12-hour shifts. The potential implications of such
overtime for safety were made apparent during the attempted launch of
mission 61-C on January 6, 1986, when fatigue and shiftwork were
cited as major contributing factors to a serious incident involving a
liquid oxygen depletion that occurred less than five minutes before
scheduled lift off. The issue of workload at Kennedy is discussed in
more detail in Appendix G.

Another example of a system designed during
the developmental phase and struggling to keep up with operational
requirements is the Shuttle Mission Simulator. There are currently
two simulators. They support the bulk of a crew's training for
ascent, orbit and entry phases of a Shuttle mission. Studies indicate
two simulators can support no more than 12- 15 flights per year. The
flight rate at the time of the accident was about to saturate the
system's capability to provide trained astronauts for those flights.
Furthermore, the two existing simulator s are out-of-date and require
constant attention to keep them operating at capacity to meet even
the rate of 12-15 flights per year. Although there are plans to
improve capability, funds for those improvements are minimal and
spread out over a 10-year period. This is another clear demonstration
that the system was trying to develop its capabilities to meet an
operational schedule but was not given the time, opportunity or
resources to do it. 7

Responding to Challenges and
Changes

Another obstacle in the path toward
accommodation of a higher flight rate is NASA's legendary "can-do"
attitude. The attitude that enabled the agency to put men on the moon
and to build the Space Shuttle will not allow it to pass up an
exciting challenge-even though accepting the challenge may drain
resources from the more mundane (but necessary) aspects of the
program.

A recent example is NASA's decision to perform
a spectacular retrieval of two communications satellites whose upper
stage motors had failed to raise them to the proper geosynchronous
orbit. NASA itself then proposed to the insurance companies who owned
the failed satellites that the agency design a mission to rendezvous
with them in turn and that an astronaut in a jet backpack fly over to
escort the satellites into the Shuttle's payload bay for a return to
Earth.

The mission generated considerable excitement
within NASA and required a substantial effort to develop the
necessary techniques, hardware and procedures. The mission was
conceived, created, designed and accomplished within 10 months. The
result, mission 51-A (November, 1984), was a resounding success, as
both failed satellites were successfully returned to Earth. The
retrieval mission vividly demonstrated the service that astronauts
and the Space Shuttle can perform .

Ten months after the first retrieval mission,
NASA launched a mission to repair another communications satellite
that had failed in low-Earth orbit. Again, the mission was developed
and executed on relatively short notice and was resoundingly
successful for both NASA and the satellite insurance industry.

The satellite retrieval missions were not
isolated occurrences. Extraordinary efforts on NASA's part in
developing and accomplishing missions will, and should, continue, but
such efforts will be a substantial additional drain on resources.
NASA cannot both accept the relatively spur-of [ 172 ] the-moment missions
that its "can-do" attitude tends to generate and also maintain the
planning and scheduling discipline required to operate as a "space
truck" on a routine and cost-effective basis. As the flight rate
increases, the cost in resources and the accompanying impact on
future operations must be considered when infrequent but
extraordinary efforts are undertaken. The system is still not
sufficiently developed as a "production line" process in terms of
planning or implementation procedures. It cannot routinely or even
periodically accept major disruptions without considerable cost.
NASA's attitude historically has reflected the position that "We can
do anything," and while that may essentially be true, NASA's optimism
must be tempered by the realization that it cannot do
everything.

NASA has always taken a positive approach to
problem solving and has not evolved to the point where its officials
are willing to say they no longer have the resources to respond to
proposed changes. Harold Draughon, manager of the Mission Integration
Office at Johnson, reinforced this point by describing what would
have to happen in 1986 to achieve the flight rate:

"The next time the guy came in and
said 'I want to get off this flight and want to move down two' [the
system would have had to say,] We can't do that,' and that would have
been the decision." 8

Even in the event of a hardware problem, after
the problem is fixed there is still a choice about how to respond.
Flight 41-D had a main engine shutdown on the launch pad. It had a
commercial payload on it, and the NASA Customer Services division
wanted to put that commercial payload on the next flight (replacing
some NASA payloads) to satisfy more customers. Draughon described the
effect of that decision to the Commission: "We did that. We did not
have to. And the system went out and put that in work, but it paid a
price. The next three or four flights all slipped as a result."
9

NASA was being too bold in shuffling
manifests. The total resources available to the Shuttle program for-
allocation were fixed. As time went on, the agency had to focus those
resources more and more on the near term-worrying about today's
problem and not focusing on tomorrow's.

NASA also did not have a way to forecast the
effect of a change of a manifest. As already indicated, a change to
one flight ripples through the manifest and typically necessitates
changes to many other flights, each requiring resources (budget,
manpower, facilities) to implement. Some changes are more expensive
than others, but all have an impact, and those impacts must be
understood.

In fact, Leonard Nicholson, manager of Space
Transportation System Integration and Operations at Johnson, in
arguing for the development of a forecasting tool, illustrated the
fact that the resources were spread thin: "The press of business
would have hindered us getting that kind of tool in place, just the
fact that all of us were busy . . . . " 10

The effect of shuffling major payloads can be
significant. In addition, as stated earlier, even apparently "easy"
changes put demands on the resources of the system Any middeck or
secondary payload has, by itself, a minimal impact compared with
major payloads. But when several changes are made, and made late,
they put significant stress on the flight preparation process by
diverting resources from higher priority problems.

Volume III of JSC 07700, Revision B, specifies
that all middeck experiments must be scheduled, and payload
specialists assigned, 11 weeks before launch. 11 That rule has not been
enforced-in fact, it is more honored in the breach than in the
observance. A review of missions 41-G through 61-C revealed that of
the 16 payload specialists added to those flights, seven were added
after launch minus five months.

Even "secondary" payloads take a lot of time
and attention when they are added to a flight late. Harold
Draughon:

"I spend more than half of my time
working on things that are not very important because they get put in
so late. Rather than working on PAM's [Payload Assist Modules] and
IUS's [Inertial Upper Stages], I am working on chicken eggs."
12

Those directing the changes in the manifest
were not yet sensitive to the problem. Each change nibbles away at
the operational resources, and the changes were occurring frequently,
even routinely. Much of the capacity of the system was being used up
responding to late changes in lower priority experiments. That
flexibility toward secondary experiments tied up the resources that
would have been better spent building capability to meet the
projected flight rate.

[ 173 ] Tommy Holloway,
chief of the Johnson Flight Director Office, emphasized that, given
finite resources, one must decide: "It's flight rate versus
[manifest] flexibility.'' l3

The portion of the system forced to respond to
the late changes in the manifest tried to bring its concerns to
Headquarters. As Mr. Nicholson explained,

"We have done enough complaining
about it that I cannot believe there is not a growing awareness, but
the political aspects of the decision are so overwhelming that our
concerns do not carry much weight.... The general argument we gave
about distracting the attention of the team late in the process of
implementing the flight is a qualitative argument .... And in the
face of that, political advantages of implementing those late changes
outweighed our general objections. " 14

It is important to determine how many flights
can be accommodated, and accommodated safely. NASA must establish a
realistic level of expectation, then approach it carefully. Mission
schedules should be based on a realistic assessment of what NASA can
do safely and well, not on what is possible with maximum effort. The
ground rules must be established firmly, and then enforced.

The attitude is important, and the word
operational can mislead. "Operational" should not imply any less
commitment to quality or safety, nor a dilution of resources. The
attitude should be, "We are going to fly high risk flights this year;
every one is going to be a challenge, and every one is going to
involve some risk, so we had better be careful in our approach to
each." 15

Effect of Flight Rate on Spare
Parts

As the flight rate increases, the demand on
resources and the demand for spare parts increases. Since 1981, NASA
has had logistics plans for Shuttle flight rates of 12 and 24 flights
a year. It was originally forecast (in mid-1983) that the supply of
spares required to support 12 flights annually could be accomplished
in the spring of 1986. Actual inventory of spare parts had run close
to plan until the second quarter of fiscal year 1985. At that time,
inventory requirements for spares began to increase faster than
deliveries. A year later, when inventory stockage should have been
complete, only 32,000 of the required 50,000 items (65 percent) had
been delivered. 16

The spare parts plan to support 24 flights per
year had called for completing inventory stockage by June, 1987. By
mid-1985, that schedule was in jeopardy.

The logistics plan could not be fully
implemented because of budget reductions. In October, 1985, the
logistics funding requirement for the Orbiter program, as determined
by Level III management at Johnson, was $285.3 million. That funding
was reduced by $83.3 million-a cut that necessitated major deferrals
of spare parts purchases. Purchasing deferrals come at great cost.
For example, a reduction due to deferral of $11.2 million in fiscal
year 1986 would cost $11.2 million in fiscal year 1987, plus an
additional $21.6 million in fiscal year 1988. This three-to-one ratio
of future cost to current savings is not uncommon. Indeed, the ratio
in many instances is as high as seven to one. This practice cannot
make sense by any standard of good financial management.

According to Johnson officials, reductions in
spares expenditures provided savings required to meet the revised
budgets. As Program Manager Arnold Aldrich reported to the
Commission:

"There had been fund contentions
in the program for a number of years, at least starting in the
mid-seventies and running through into the early to mid-eighties . .
. intentional decisions were made to defer the heavy build-up of
spare parts procurements in the program so that the funds could be
devoted to other more pressing activities. . . . It was a regular
occurrence for several annual budget cycles. And once the flight rate
really began to rise and it was really clear that spare parts were
going to be a problem, significant attention was placed on that
problem by all levels of NASA and efforts had been made to catch up.
But . . . our parts availability is well behind the flight need . .
." 17

Those actions resulted in a critical shortage
of serviceable spare components. To provide parts required to support
the flight rate, NASA had to resort to cannibalization. Extensive
cannibalization of spares, i.e., the removal of components
[ 174 ]
from one Orbiter for installation in another, became an essential
modus operandi in order to maintain flight schedules. Forty-five out
of approximately 300 required parts were cannibalized for Challenger
before mission 51-L. These parts spanned the spectrum from common
bolts to a thrust control actuator for the orbital maneuvering system
to a fuel cell. This practice is costly and disruptive, and it
introduces opportunities for component damage.

This concern was summarized in testimony
before the Commission by Paul Weitz, deputy chief of the Astronaut
Office at Johnson:

"It increases the exposure of both
Orbiters to intrusion by people. Every time you get people inside and
around the Orbiter you stand a chance of' inadvertent damage of
whatever type, whether you leave a tool behind or whether you,
without knowing it, step on a wire bundle or a tube or something
along those lines." 18

Cannibalization is a potential threat to
flight safety, as parts are removed from one Orbiter, installed in
another Orbiter, and eventually replaced. Each handling introduces
another opportunity for imperfections in installation and for damage
to the parts and spacecraft.

Cannibalization also drains resources, as one
Kennedy official explained to the Commission on March 5, 1986:

"It creates a large expenditure in
manpower at KSC. A job that you would have normally used what we will
call one unit of' effort to do the job now requires two units of
effort because you've got two ships [Orbiters] to do the task with."
19

Prior to the Challenger accident, the shortage
of' spare parts had no serious impact on flight schedules, but
cannibalization is possible only so long as Orbiters from which to
borrow are available. In the spring of 1986, there would have been no
Orbiters to use as "spare parts bins." Columbia was to fly in March,
Discovery was to be sent to Vandenberg, and Atlantis and Challenger
were to fly in May. In a Commission interview, Kennedy director of
Shuttle Engineering Horace Lamberth predicted the program would have
been unable to continue:

"I think we would have been
brought to our knees this spring [1986] by this problem [spare parts]
if we had kept trying to fly " 20

NASA's processes for spares provisioning
(determining the appropriate spares inventory levels), procurement
and inventory control are complicated and could be streamlined and
simplified.

As of spring 1986, the Space Shuttle logistics
program was approximately one year behind. Further, the replenishment
of all spares (even parts that are not currently available in the
system) has been stopped. Unless logistics support is improved, the
ability to maintain even a three-Orbiter fleet is in jeopardy.

Spare parts provisioning is yet another
illustration that the Shuttle program was not prepared for an
operational schedule. The policy was shortsighted and led to
cannibalization in order to meet the increasing flight rate.

The Importance of Flight
Experience

In a developmental program it is important to
make use of flight experience, both to understand the system's actual
performance and to uncover problems that might not have been
discovered in testing. Because Shuttle flights were coming in fairly
rapid succession, it was becoming difficult to analyze all the data
from one flight before the next was scheduled to launch. In fact, the
Flight Readiness Review for 51-L was held while mission 61-C was
still in orbit. Obviously, it was impossible to even present, much
less analyze and understand, anomalies from that flight.

The point can be emphasized by citing two
problems that occurred during mission 61-C but were discovered too
late to be considered at the 51-L Flight Readiness Review:

1. The Space Shuttle brakes and
tires have long been a source of concern. In particular, after the
51-D Orbiter blew a tire at Kennedy in April, 1985, there was
considerable effort (within budgetary constraints) to understand and
resolve the problems, and Kennedy landings were suspended until
certain improvements were made. (See section "Landing: Another
Critical Phase!" page 186.) Mission 51 -L was to be the first flight
to land [ 175 ] in Florida since 51 -D had experienced brake
problems. STS 61-C landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California on
January 19, 1986, four days after the 51-L Flight Readiness Review.
The 61-C brakes were removed following landing and shipped to the
vendor for further inspection and analysis. That inspection revealed
major brake damage. The subsystem manager at Johnson in charge of the
brakes did not receive the information until January 27, 1986, one
day before 51-L was launched, and did not learn the extent of the
problem until January 30, 1986.

2. The inspection of the 61 -C Solid Rocket
Booster segments was completed on January 19, 1986, four days after
the 51-L Level I Flight Readiness Review. The post-recovery
inspection of the 61 -C Solid Rocket Booster segments revealed that
there was O-ring erosion in one of the left booster field joints and
additional O-ring anomalies on both booster nozzles. Although the
information was available for Marshall's 51 -L Level III review at
launch minus one day, it was clearly not available in time for
consideration in the formal launch preparation
process. 21 These examples underscore the need to establish a list
of mandatory post-flight inspections that must precede any subsequent
launch.

Effect on Payload Safety

The payload safety process exists to ensure
that each Space Shuttle payload is safe to fly and that on a given
mission the total integrated cargo does not create a hazard. NASA
policy is to minimize its involvement in the payload design process.
The payload developer is responsible for producing a safe design, and
the developer must verify compliance with NASA safety requirements.
The Payload Safety Panel at Johnson conducts a phased series of
safety reviews for each payload. At those reviews, the payload
developer presents material to enable the panel to assess the
payload's compliance with safety requirements.

Problems may be identified late, however,
often as a result of late changes in the payload design and late
inputs from the payload developer. Obviously, the later a hazard is
identified, the more difficult it will be to correct, but the payload
safety process has worked well in identifying and resolving safety
hazards.

Unfortunately, pressures to maintain the
flight schedule may influence decisions on payload safety provisions
and hazard acceptance. This influence was evident in circumstances
surrounding the development of two high priority scientific payloads
and their associated booster, the Centaur.

Centaur is a Space Shuttle-compatible booster
that can be used to carry heavy satellites from the Orbiter's cargo
bay to deep space. It was scheduled to fly on two Shuttle missions in
May, 1986, sending the NASA Galileo spacecraft to Jupiter and the
European Space Agency Ulysses spacecraft first to Jupiter and then
out of the planets' orbital plane over the poles of the Sun. The
pressure to meet the schedule was substantial because missing launch
in May or early June meant a year's wait before planetary alignment
would again be satisfactory.

Unfortunately, a. number of safety and
schedule issues clouded Centaur's use. In particular, Centaur's
highly volatile cryogenic propellants created several problems. If a
return-to-launch-site abort ever becomes necessary, the propellants
will definitely have to be dumped overboard. Continuing safety
concerns about the means and feasibility of dumping added pressure to
the launch preparation schedule as the program struggled to meet the
launch dates.

Of four required payload safety reviews,
Centaur had completed three at the time of the Challenger accident,
but unresolved issues remained from the last two. In November, 1985,
the Payload Safety Panel raised several important safety concerns.
The final safety review, though scheduled for late January, 1986,
appeared to be slipping to February, only three months before the
scheduled launches.

Several safety waivers had been granted, and
several others were pending. Late design changes to accommodate
possible system failure would probably have required reconsideration
of some of the approved waivers. The military version of the Centaur
booster, which was not scheduled to fly for some time, was to be
modified to provide added safety, but because of the rush to get the
1986 missions launched, these improvements were not approved for the
first two Centaur boosters. After the 51-L accident, NASA allotted
more than $75 million to incorporate the [ 176 ] operational and
safety improvements to these two vehicles. 22 We will never know whether the payload safety program
would have allowed the Centaur missions to fly in 1986. Had they
flown, however, they would have done so without the level of
protection deemed essential after the accident.

Outside Pressure to Launch

After the accident, rumors appeared in the
press to the effect that persons who made the decision to launch
mission 51-L might have been subjected to outside pressure to launch.
Such rumors concerning unnamed persons, emanating from anonymous
sources about events that may never have happened, are difficult to
disprove and dispel. Nonetheless, during the Commission's hearings
all persons who played key roles in that decision were questioned.
Each one attested, under oath, that there had been no outside
intervention or pressure of any kind leading up to the launch.

There was a large number of other persons who
were involved to a lesser extent in that decision, and they were
questioned. All of those persons provided the Commission with sworn
statements that they knew of no outside pressure or intervention.
23

The Commission and its staff also questioned a
large number of other witnesses during the course of the
investigation. No evidence was reported to the Commission which
indicated that any attempt was ever made by anyone to apply pressure
on those making the decision to launch the Challenger.

Although there was total lack of evidence that
any outside pressure was ever exerted on those who made the decision
to launch 51-L, a few speculative reports persisted.

One rumor was that plans had been made to have
a live communication hookup with the 51-L crew during the State of
the Union Message. Commission investigators interviewed all of the
persons who would have been involved in a hookup if one had been
planned, and all stated unequivocally that there was no such plan.
Furthermore, to give the crew time to become oriented, NASA does not
schedule a communication for at least 48 hours after the launch and
no such communication was scheduled in the case of flight
51-L.

The flight activity officer who was
responsible for developing the crew activity plan testified that
three live telecasts were planned for the Challenger, but they
related in no way to the State of the Union Message:
24

During the teacher activities on flight
day 4.

During the phase partitioning experiment
on flight day 5.

During the crew conference on flight day
6.

The Commission concluded that the decision to
launch the Challenger was made solely by the appropriate NASA
officials without any outside intervention or pressure.

Findings

1. The capabilities of the system were
stretched to the limit to support the flight rate in winter
1985/1986. Projections into the spring and summer of 1986 showed a
clear trend; the system, as it existed, would have been unable to
deliver crew training software for scheduled flights by the
designated dates. The result would have been an unacceptable
compression of the time available for the crews to accomplish their
required training.

2. Spare parts are in critically short supply.
The Shuttle program made a conscious decision to postpone spare parts
procurements in favor of budget items of perceived higher priority.
Lack of spare parts would likely have limited flight operations in
1986.

3. Stated manifesting policies are not
enforced. Numerous late manifest changes (after the cargo integration
review) have been made to both major payloads and minor payloads
throughout the Shuttle program.

Late changes to major payloads or program
requirements can require extensive resources (money, manpower,
facilities) to implement.

If many late changes to "minor" payloads
occur, resources are quickly absorbed.

Payload specialists frequently were added
to a flight well after announced deadlines.

Late changes to a mission adversely affect
the training and development of procedures for subsequent
missions.

[ 177 ] 4. The scheduled
flight rate did not accurately reflect the capabilities and
resources.

The flight rate was not reduced to
accommodate periods of adjustment in the capacity of the work
force. There was no margin in the system to accommodate unforeseen
hardware problems.

Resources were primarily directed toward
supporting the flights and thus not enough were available to
improve and expand facilities needed to support a higher flight
rate.

5. Training simulators may be the limiting
factor on the flight rate: the two current simulators cannot train
crews for more than 12-15 flights per year.

6. When flights come in rapid succession,
current requirements do not ensure that critical anomalies occurring
during one flight are identified and addressed appropriately before
the next flight.

References

1. Hearings of the U.S.
Senate, Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations, May 5,
1982, page 1029.

2. Interview with NASA
Administrator James Beggs," Space Business News, September 12,
1983.

3. See Appendix, NASA
Mission Planning and Operations Team Report (Preliminary), April,
1986, page 86.

4. Commission Work
Session, Mission Planning and Operations Panel, April 1, 1986,
JSC. page 198.

5. Commission Work
Session, Mission Planning and Operations Panel, April 1, 1980,
JSC, page 198.

6. NASA Memo,
DA-RRR-86-06.

7. See Appendix J, NASA
Mission Planning and Operations Team Report (Preliminary), April,
1986, pages 58-59.

8. Commission Work
Session, Mission Planning and Operations Panel, March 24, 1986,
JSC, page 130.

9. Commission Work
Session. Mission Planning and Operations Panel, March 24, 1986,
JSC, page 126.

10. Commission Work
Session, Mission Planning and Operations Panel, April 8, 1986,
JSC, page 240.

11. Page 12.

12. Commission Work
Session, Mission Planning and Operations Panel, April 1, 1986,
JSC, page 205.

13. Commission Work
Session, Mission Planning and Operations Panel, April 8, 1986,
JSC, pages 216-218.

14. Commission Work
Session, Mission Planning and Operations Panel, April 8, 1986,
JSC, pages 216-218.

15. Commission Work
Session, Mission Planning and Operations Panel, April 8, 1986,
JSC, pages 262-263.

16. NASA Memo from
Goetz, R.. "Logistics Responsibility Transfer from NASA JSC to
NASA KSC," February 6, 1986

17. Commission Hearing
Transcript, April 3, 1986, page 2544.

18. Commission Hearing
Transcript, April 3, 1986, page 2445.

19. Commission Work
Session, Mission Planning and Operations Panel, March 5, 1986,
KSC, page 306.

20. Commission Work
Session, Mission Planning and Operations Panel, March 4, 1986,
KSC, page 304.

21. Report, "SRM
Post-flight Hardware Inspection Report for STS 61-C," Part 1 of 2,
January 24, 1986, pages 51-52.

22. Cost figures were
provided by the Centaur program manager, telephone call, May 16,
1986.

23. Twenty-eight
Affidavits submitted to the Commission.

24. Commission
Interview Transcript, Ehlers. K., April 16, 1986, JSC, pages
1-10.

