

v1ch7

Report of the PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION
on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident

Chapter VII: The Silent Safety
Program.

[ 152 ] The Commission was
surprised to realize after many hours of' testimony that NASA's
safety staff was never mentioned. No witness related the approval or
disapproval of the reliability engineers, and none expressed the
satisfaction or dissatisfaction of the quality assurance staff. No
one thought to invite a safety representative or a reliability and
quality assurance engineer to the January 27, 1986, teleconference
between Marshall and Thiokol. Similarly, there was no representative
of safety on the Mission Manage-ment Team that made key decisions
during the countdown on January 28, 1986. The Commission is concerned
about the symptoms that it sees.

The unrelenting pressure to meet the demands
of an accelerating flight schedule might have been adequately handled
by NASA if it had insisted upon the exactingly thorough procedures
that were its hallmark during the Apollo program. An extensive and
redundant safety program comprising interdependent safety,
reliability and quality assurance functions existed during and after
the lunar program to discover any potential safety problems. Between
that period and 1986, however, the program became ineffective. This
loss of effectiveness seriously degraded the checks and balances
essential for maintaining flight safety.

On April 3, 1986, Arnold Aldrich, the Space
Shuttle program manager, appeared before the Commission at a public
hearing in Washington, D.C. He described five different communication
or organization failures that affected the launch decision on January
28, 1986. 1 Four of those failures relate directly to faults
within the safety program. These faults include a lack of problem
reporting requirements, inadequate trend analysis, misrepresentation
of criticality and lack of involvement in critical discussions.
2 A properly staffed, supported, and robust safety
organization might well have avoided these faults and thus eliminated
the communication failures.

NASA has a safety program to ensure that the
communication failures to which Mr. Aldrich referred do not occur. In
the case of mission 51-L, that program fell short.

NASA's Safety Program

The NASA Safety, Reliability and Quality
Assurance Program should play an important role in agency activities,
for the three concerns indicated in the program title are its
functions. In general terms, the program monitors the status of
equipment, validation of design, problem analysis and system
acceptability. Each of these has flight safety implications.

More specifically, safety includes the
preparation and execution of plans for accident prevention, flight
system safety and industrial safety requirements. Within the Shuttle
program, safety analyses focus on potential hazards and the
assessment of acceptable risks.

Reliability refers to processes for
determining that particular components and systems can be relied on
to work as planned. One product of such processes is a Critical Items
List that identifies how serious the failure of a particular item or
system would be.

Quality assurance is closely related to both
safety and reliability. All NASA elements prepare [ 153 ] plans and institute
procedures to insure that high standards of quality are maintained.
To accomplish that goal, elements charged with responsibility for
quality assurance establish procedural controls, assess inspection
programs, and participate in a problem identification and reporting
system .

The Chief Engineer at NASA Headquarters, has
overall responsibility for safety, reliability and quality assurance.
The ability of the Chief Engineer to manage NASA's safety program is
limited by the structure of safety, reliability and quality assurance
organizations within the agency. His limited staff of 20
persons 3 includes only one who spends 25 percent of his time on
Shuttle maintainability, reliability and quality assurance and
another who spends 10 percent of his time on these vital aspects of
flight safety. 4

At Johnson, a large number of government and
contractor engineers support the safety, reliability and quality
assurance program, but needed expertise concerning Marshall hardware
is absent. Thus the effectiveness of the oversight responsibilities
at Level II was limited. 5

Kennedy has a myriad of safety, reliability
and quality assurance organizations. In most cases, these
organizations report to supervisors who are responsible for
processing. The clear implication of such a management structure is
that it fails to provide the kind of independent role necessary for
flight safety.

At Marshall, the director of Reliability and
Quality Assurance reports to the director of Science and Engineering
who oversees the development of Shuttle hardware. Again, this results
in a lack of independence from the producer of hardware and is
compounded by reductions in manpower, 6 the net bringing about a decrease in effectiveness
which has direct implications for flight safety.

Monitoring Safety Critical Items

As part of the safety, reliability and quality
assurance effort, components of the Shuttle system are assigned to
criticality categories as follows:

Criticality 1

Loss of life or vehicle if the
component fails.

Criticality 2

Loss of mission if the component
fails.

Criticality 3

All others.

Criticality 1R

Redundant components, the failure of
both could cause loss of life or vehicle.

Criticality 2R

Redundant components, the failure of
both could cause loss of mission.

The assignment of criticality follows a highly
detailed analysis of each Space Shuttle component to determine the
effect of various ways the component could fail. This analysis always
assumes the most adverse conditions with the most conservative
assumptions. Any component that does not meet the fail-safe design
requirement is designated a Criticality 1 item and must receive a
waiver for use. A Critical Items List is produced that contains
information about all Criticality 1 components. The Solid Rocket
Booster Critical Items List entry for the field joint, dated December
17, 1982 is an example of this process.

Component criticality is related to test
requirements in the Operational Maintenance Requirements and
Specifications Document published and maintained by Level II at
Johnson. For the Orbiter, the references from the Critical Items List
to the requirements and specifications document are complete and
traceable in both directions. The Solid Rocket Booster Critical Items
List, however, does not include references to the requirements and
specifications document. 7 Such references would make the Critical Items List a
more efficient management tool for tracking activities concerned with
items critical for flight safety.

The next step in procedures documentation is
the Operations and Maintenance Instruction, which develops the
directives into step-by-step procedures used at Kennedy by
technicians, inspectors and test personnel to accomplish each step of
the hardware preparations for flight. The current Operations and
Maintenance Instruction does not indicate the criticality level of
components.

If the Operations and Maintenance Instruction
clearly indicated when the work to be performed related to a
Criticality 1 component, all concerned would be alerted that a higher
than normal level of care should be used. The same point applies to
production activities at Thiokol where criticality should be directly
incorporated into manufacturing quality planning.

[ 154 ] Problem Reporting

Prior to 1983, Level III was required to
report all problems, trends, and problem closeout actions to Level II
unless the problem was associated with hardware that was not flight
critical. 8 Unfortunately, this requirement was substantially
reduced to include only those problems which dealt with common
hardware items or physical interface elements. The revision
eliminated reporting on flight safety problems, flight schedule
problems, and problem trends.

The change to the reporting requirements was
signed by James B. Jackson, Jr., for Glynn Lunney, who was at that
time manager of the National Space Transportation System (Level II
manager). The change was submitted by Martin Raines, director of
Safety, Reliability and Quality Assurance at
Johnson. 9 With this action, Level II lost all insight into
safety, operational and flight schedule issues resulting from Level
III problems.

On May 19, 1986, Mr. Raines wrote a memo in
which he explained that the documentation change was made in an
attempt to streamline the system since the old requirements were not
productive for the operational phase of the Shuttle
program. 10 In retrospect, it is still difficult to understand why
the director of Safety, Reliability and Quality Assurance at Johnson
initiated this action, and it is even more difficult to understand
why Level II approved it.

A review of all Level III monthly problem
reports (Open Problem List) issued by Marshall during 1984 and 1985
indicates that none was distributed to Level II management. From a
lengthy list of recipients, only a single copy was sent to Johnson,
and that one was sent to an engineer in the flight control division.
Mr. Aldrich's office and the entire Johnson safety, reliability and
quality assurance directorate were not on the distribution list for
the problem reports. A Rockwell International safety, reliability and
quality assurance contractor at Johnson received a statistical
summary of problem status, but not the actual problems
descriptions.

Reporting of In-flight Anomalies

A second method of notifying Level II of
problems would have been through the in-flight anomaly reporting
channels. The identification and resolution of anomalies that occur
during flight are addressed in Space Shuttle Program Directive 34E.
For the Solid Rocket Booster, the Huntsville Operations Support
Center is charged with these activities as well as other evaluations
and documentation of' mission results.

"The Space Shuttle Project
Managers at Kennedy, Johnson, and Marshall, and the Manager for
Systems Integration are responsible for the implementation of' this
directive in their respective areas." 11

A letter dated October 20, 1981, from the
manager of' the National Space Transportation System (Level II)
addressed flight anomaly resolution:

"Beginning with the STS-2
evaluations, the enclosed new form and instructions, outlined in
enclosure 1, will be utilized for all official flight anomaly
closeouts. Flight anomalies will be presented for review and closeout
at the Noon Special PRCB [Program Requirements Change Board]. The
briefing charts will be prepared by the Project elements, and should
include a schematic/graph/sketch of the problem area. This material,
along with the closeout form and appropriate signatures, will become
a part of the permanent closeout record. Enclosure 2 provides a
sample of' closeout material from STS- 1 that would be
acceptable.

"Your cooperation in this activity will be
appreciated." 12

Since O-ring erosion and blow-by were
considered by Marshall to be highs anomalies, 13 the letter above would appear to require reporting by
the Solid Rocket Booster Project Office to Level II. However, the
sample closeout material attached to the 1981 letter was identified
as pertaining to "Flight Test" (the first four flights). The 1983
change might well have been interpreted as superseding the 1981
Lunney letter, particularly since the program officially
became"operational" in late 1982.

The reporting of anomalies (unexpected events
or unexplained departures from past experience) that occur during
mission performance is a key ingredient in any reliability and
quality assurance program. Through accurate reporting, careful
analysis and thorough testing, problems or recurrence of problems can
be prevented. In an effective program, reporting, analysis, testing
and [ 155 ] implementation of corrective measures must be fully
documented .

The level of management that should be
informed is a function of the seriousness of the problem. For
Criticality 1 equipment anomalies, the communications must reach all
levels of management. Highly detailed and specific procedures for
reporting anomalies and problems are essential to the entire process.
The procedures must be understood and followed by all.

Unfortunately, NASA does not have a concise
set of problem reporting requirements. Those in effect are found in
numerous individual documents, and there is little agreement about
which document applies to a given level of management under a given
set of circumstances for a given anomaly.

Safety Program Failures

The safety, reliability and quality assurance
program at Marshall serves a dual role. It is responsible for
assuring that the hardware delivered for use on the Space Shuttle
meets design specifications. In addition, it acts as a "watch dog" on
the system to assure that sound engineering judgment is exercised in
the use of hardware and in appraising hardware problems. Limited
human resources and an organization that placed reliability and
quality assurance functions under the director of Science and
Engineering reduced the capability of the "watch dog" role.

Much of what follows concerns engineering
judgments and decisions by engineers and managers at Marshall and
Morton Thiokol. It is the validity of these judgments that the
Commission has examined closely. In its "watch dog" role, an
effectively functioning safety, reliability and quality assurance
organization could have taken action to prevent the 51-L
accident.

In the discussion that follows, various
aspects of the Solid Rocket Booster joint design issue discussed
earlier will be reviewed in the context of safety, reliability and
quality assurance. The critical issue, discussed in detail elsewhere,
involves the O-rings installed to seal the booster joints.

Trend Data

Development of trend data and the possible
relationships between problems is a standard and expected function of
any reliability and quality assurance program. As previously noted,
the history of problems with the Solid Rocket Booster O-ring took an
abrupt turn in January, 1984, when an ominous trend began. Until that
date, only one field joint O-ring anomaly had been found during the
first nine flights of the Shuttle. Beginning with the tenth mission,
however, and concluding with the twenty-fifth, the Challenger flight,
more than half of the missions experienced field joint O-ring blow-by
or erosion of some kind .

In retrospect, this trend is easily
recognizable. According to Wiley Bunn, director of Reliability and
Quality Assurance at Marshall:

"I agree with you from my purview
in quality, but we had that data. It was a matter of assembling that
data and looking at it in the proper fashion. Had we done that, the
data just jumps off the page at you." 14

This striking change in performance should
have been observed and perhaps traced to a root cause. No such trend
analysis was conducted. While flight anomalies involving the O-rings
received considerable attention at Morton Thiokol and at Marshall,
the significance of the developing trend went unnoticed. The safety,
reliability and quality assurance program, of course, exists to
ensure that such trends are recognized when they occur.

A series of changes to Solid Rocket Booster
processing procedures at Kennedy may be significant: on-site O-ring
inspections were discontinued; O-ring leak check stabilization
pressure on the field joint was increased to 200 pound per square
inch from 100, sometimes blowing holes through the protective putty;
the patterns for positioning the putty were changed; the putty type
was changed; re-use of motor segment casings increased; and a new
government contractor began management of Solid Rocket Booster
assembly. One of these developments or a combination of them was
probably the cause of the higher anomaly rate. The safety,
reliability and quality assurance program should have tracked and
discovered the reason for the increasing erosion and blow-by.

The history of problems in the nozzle joint is
similar to that of the Solid Rocket Booster field joint. While
several of the changes mentioned above also could have influenced the
frequency.....

[ 156 ]

Pressure tests at 200 pounds per
square inch of the Solid Rocket Booster joints produced bubbles in
putty used to line the joints.

..... of
nozzle O-ring problems, the frequency correlates with leak check
pressure to a remarkable degree.

Again, development of trend data is a standard
and expected function of any reliability and quality assurance
program. Even the most cursory examination of failure rate should
have indicated that a serious and potentially disastrous situation
was developing on all Solid Rocket Booster joints. Not recognizing
and reporting this trend can only be described, in NASA terms, as a
"quality escape," a failure of the program to preclude an avoidable
problem. If the program had functioned properly, the Challenger
accident might have been avoided. The trend should have been
identified and analyzed to discover the physical processes damaging
the O-ring and thus jeopardizing the integrity of the joint.

A likely cause of the O-ring erosion appears
to have been the increased leak check pressure that caused hazardous
blow holes in the putty. Such holes at booster ignition provide a
ready path for combustion gases directly to the O-ring. The blow
holes were known to be created by the higher pressure used in the
leak check. The phenomenon was observed and even photographed prior
to a test firing in Utah on May 9, 1985. In that particular case, the
grease from the O-ring was actually blown through the putty and was
visible on the inside core of the Solid Rocket Booster.

The trends of flight anomalies in relation to
leak check stabilization pressure are illustrated for the field joint
and the nozzle joint in Figure 3, on page
133 . While the data point concerning
the 100 pound per square inch field joint leak check is not
conclusive since it is based on only two flights, the trend is
apparent.

Management Awareness

During its investigation, the Commission
repeatedly heard witnesses refer to redundancy in the Solid Rocket
Motor joint and argue over the criticality of the joint. While the
field joint has been categorized as a Criticality 1 item since 1982
(page 157), most of the problem reporting paperwork generated by
Thiokol and Marshall listed it as Criticality 1 R, perhaps leading
some managers to believe-wrongly-that redundancy existed. The Problem
Assessment System operated by Rockwell contractors at Marshall, which
routinely updates the problem status still listed the field joint as
Criticality 1R on March 7,1986, more than five weeks after the
accident. Such misrepresentation of criticality must also be
categorized as a failure of the safety, reliability and quality
assurance program. As a result, informed decision making by key
managers was impossible.

[ 157 ]

[ 158 ]

["SRB Critical Items List; Dated:
December 17, 1982. Failure mode & causes: Leakage at case
assembly joints due to redundant O-ring seal failures or primary seal
and leak check port O-ring failure." text added for clarity, Chris
Gamble, html editor]

[ 159 ] Mr. Bunn, the
director of Reliability and Quality Assurance at Marshall, stated on
April 7, 1986:

"But the other thing you will
notice on those problem reports is that for some reason on the
individual problem reports we kept sticking [Criticality] 1-R on them
and that is just a sheer quality escape." 15

The Impact of Misinformation

The manner in which misinformation influences
top management has been illustrated by former Associate Administrator
for Space Flight Jesse Moore.

"And then we had a Flight
Readiness Review, I guess, in July, getting ready for a mid-July or a
late July flight, and the action had come back from the project
office. I guess the Level III had reported to the Level II Flight
Readiness Review, and then they reported up to me that-they reported
the two erosions on the primary (O-ring) and some 10 or 12 percent
erosion on the secondary (O-ring) on that flight in April, and the
corrective actions, I guess, that had been put in place was to
increase the test pressure, I think, from 50 psi [pounds per square
inch] to 200 psi or 100 psi-I guess it was 200 psi is the number-and
they felt that they had run a bunch of laboratory tests and analyses
that showed that by increasing the pressure up to 200 psi, this would
minimize or eliminate the erosion, and that there would be a fairly
good degree of safety factor margin on the erosion as a result of
increasing this pressure and ensuring that the secondary seal had
been seated. And so we left that FRR [Flight Readiness Review] with
that particular action closed by the project ," 16

Not only was Mr. Moore misinformed about the
effectiveness and potential hazards associated with the long-used
"new" procedure, he also was misinformed about the issue of joint
redundancy. Apparently, no one told (or reminded) Mr. Moore that
while the Solid Rocket Booster nozzle joint was Criticality 1R, the
field joint was Criticality 1. No one told him about blow holes in
the putty, probably resulting from the increased stabilization
pressure, and no one told him that this "new" procedure had been in
use since the exact time that field joint anomalies had become
dangerously frequent. At the time of this briefing, the increased
pressure already had been used on four Solid Rocket Motor nozzle
joints, and all four had erosion. Erosion was the enemy, and
increased pressure was its ally.

While Mr. Moore was not being intentionally
deceived, he was obviously misled. The reporting system simply was
not making trends, status and problems visible with sufficient
accuracy and emphasis.

Reporting Launch Constraints

The Commission was surprised to learn that a
launch constraint had been imposed on the Solid Rocket Booster. It
was further surprised to learn that those outside of Marshall were
not notified. Because of the seriousness of the mission 51 -B nozzle
O-ring erosion incident, launch constraints were placed against the
next six Shuttle flights. A launch constraint arises from a flight
safety issue of sufficient seriousness to justify a decision not to
launch. The initial problem description stated that, "based on the
amount of charring, the erosion paths on the primary O-ring and what
is understood about the erosion phenomenon, it is believed that the
primary O-ring of SRM 16A [the Solid Rocket Motor on flight 51-B]
never seated." 17 The maximum erosion depth was 0.171 inches on the
primary O-ring and 0.032 inches on the secondary. On February 12, at
a Level III Flight Readiness Review, maximum expected erosion on
nozzle joint O-rings had been projected as 0.070 inches for the
primary and 0.004 inches for the secondary. Thus, the results far
exceeded the maximum expected. If this same ratio of actual to
projected erosion were to occur on a field joint, the erosion would
be 0.225 inches. With secondary seal inadequacy, as indicated by
Criticality 1 status, that degree of erosion could result in joint
failure and loss of vehicle and crew.

The Problem Reporting and Corrective Action
document (JSC 08126A, paragraph 3.2d) requires project offices to
inform Level II of launch constraints. That requirement was not met.
Neither Level II nor Level I was informed.

Implications of an Operational
Program

Following successful completion of the orbital
flight test phase of the Shuttle program, the system was declared to
be operational. [ 160 ] Subsequently, several safety, reliability and quality
assurance organizations found themselves with reduced and/or
reorganized functional capability. Included, notably, were the
Marshall offices where there was net attrition 18 and NASA Headquarters where there were several
reorganizations and transfers.

The apparent reason for such actions was a
perception that less safety, reliability and quality assurance
activity would be required during "routine" Shuttle operations. This
reasoning was faulty. The machinery is highly complex, and the
requirements are exacting. The Space Shuttle remains a totally new
system with little or no history. As the system matures and the
experience changes, careful tracking will be required to prevent
premature failures. As the flight rate increased, more hardware
operations were involved, and more total in-flight anomalies
occurred. 19 Tracking requirements became more rather than less
critical because of implications for the next flight in an
accelerating program.

Two problems on mission 61 -C were not
evaluated as part of the review process for the next flight, 51 -L. A
serious failure of the Orbiter wheel brake was not known to the crew
as mission 51 -L lifted off with a plan to make the first Kennedy
landing since a similar problem halted such operations in April,
1985. 20 Secondly, an O-ring erosion problem had occurred on
mission 61-C, and while it had been discovered, it had not been
incorporated into the Problem Assessment System when mission 51 -L
was launched. 21 If the program cannot come to grips with such critical
safety aspects before subsequent flights are scheduled to occur, it
obviously is moving too fast, or its safety, reliability and quality
assurance programs must be strengthened to provide more rapid
response.

The inherent risk of the Space Shuttle program
is defined by the combination of a highly dynamic environment,
enormous energies, mechanical complexities, time consuming
preparations and extremely time-critical decision making. Complacency
and failures in supervision and reporting seriously aggravate these
risks.

Rather than weaken safety, reliability and
quality assurance programs through attrition and reorganization, NASA
must elevate and strengthen these vital functions. In addition,
NASA's traditional safety, reliability and quality assurance efforts
need to be augmented by an alert and vigorous organization that
oversees the flight safety program.

Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel

The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (the
"panel" in what follows) was established in the aftermath of the
Apollo spacecraft fire January 27, 1967. Shortly thereafter the
United States Congress enacted legislation (Section 6 of the NASA
Authorization Act, 1968; 42 U.S.C. 2477) to establish the panel as a
senior advisory committee to NASA. The statutory duties of the panel
are:

"The panel shall review safety
studies and operations plans referred to it and shall make reports
thereon, shall advise the Administrator with respect to the hazards
of proposed operations and with respect to the adequacy of proposed
or existing safety standards, and shall perform such other duties as
the Administrator may request."

The panel membership is set by statute at no
more than nine members, of whom up to four may come from NASA. The
NASA Chief Engineer is an ex-officio member. The staff consists of
full-time NASA employees, and the staff director serves as both
executive secretary and technical assistant to the panel.

The role of the panel has been defined and
redefined by the members themselves, NASA senior management and
members of the House and Senate of the U.S. Congress. The panel began
to review the Space Shuttle program in 1971, and in its 1974 annual
report, it documented a shift in focus:

"The panel feels that [a] broader examination
of the programs and their management gives them more confidence than
in limiting their inquiry to safety alone." 22

Over ensuing years, the panel continued to
examine the Space Shuttle program including safety, reliability and
quality assurance; systems redundancy; flight controls; and ground
processing and handling, though management issues continued to
dominate their concerns. Following the first flight of the Shuttle,
the panel investigated a wide variety of specific subjects, to
include the lightweight External Tank, the [ 161 ] Centaur and
Inertial Upper Stage programs, Shuttle logistics and spare parts,
landing gear, tires, brakes, Solid Rocket Motor nozzles and the Solid
Rocket Motor using the filament-wound case. There is no indication,
however, that the details of Solid Rocket Booster joint design or
in-flight problems were ever the subject of a panel activity. The
efforts of this panel were not sufficiently specific and immediate to
prevent the 51 -L accident.

Space Shuttle Program Crew Safety
Panel

The Space Shuttle Crew Safety Panel,
established by Space Shuttle Program Directive 4A dated April 17,
1974, served an important function in NASA flight safety activities,
until it went out of existence in 1981. If it were still in
existence, it might have identified the kinds of problems now
associated with the 51-L mission. The purpose of the panel was
twofold: (1) to identify possible hazards to Shuttle crews and (2) to
provide guidance and advice to Shuttle program management concerning
the resolution of such conditions.

The membership of the panel comprised 10
representatives from Johnson and a single representative each from
Dryden (the NASA facility at Edwards Air Force Base, California),
Kennedy, Marshall and the Air Force.

The panel was to support the Level II Program
Requirements Control Board chaired by the project manager, and
recommendations were subject to Control Board approval.

From 1974 through 1978, the panel met on a
regular basis (24 times) and considered vital issues ranging from
mission abort contingencies to equipment acceptability. The
membership of the panel from engineering, project management and
astronaut offices ensured a minimum level of safety communications
among those organizations. This ceased to exist when the panel
effectively ceased to exist in 1980. 23 NASA had expected the panel to be functional only
"during the design, development and flight test phases" and to
"concern itself with all vehicle systems and operating modes."
24 When the original chairman, Scott H. Simpkinson,
retired in 1981, the panel was merged with a safety subpanel that
assumed neither the membership nor the functions of the safety panel.
After that time, the NASA Shuttle program had no focal point for
flight safety.

The Need for a New Safety
Organization

The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel
unquestionably has provided NASA a valuable service, which has
contributed to the safety of NASA's operations. Because of its
breadth of activities, however, it cannot be expected to uncover all
of the potential problems nor can it be charged with failure when
accidents occur that in hindsight were clearly probable. The ability
of any panel to function effectively depends on a focused scope of
responsibilities. An acceptable level of operational safety coverage
requires the total combination of NASA and contractor organizations,
working more effectively on a coordinated basis at all levels. The
Commission believes, therefore, that a top-to-bottom emphasis on
safety can best be achieved by a combination of a strong central
authority and a working level panel devoted to the operational
aspects of Shuttle flight safety.

Findings

1. Reductions in the safety,
reliability and quality assurance work force at Marshall and NASA
Headquarters have seriously limited capability in those vital
functions.

2. Organizational structures at Kennedy and
Marshall have placed safety, reliability and quality assurance
offices under the supervision of the very organizations and
activities whose efforts they are to check.

3. Problem reporting requirements are not
concise and fail to get critical information to the proper levels of
management.

4. Little or no trend analysis was performed
on O-ring erosion and blow-by problems.

5. As the flight rate increased, the Marshall
safety, reliability and quality assurance work force was decreasing,
which adversely affected mission safety.

6. Five weeks after the 51-L accident, the
criticality of the Solid Rocket Motor field joint was still not
properly documented in the problem reporting system at Marshall.

[ 162 ] References

1. Commission Interview
Transcript, April 3, 1986, page 2538.

2. Commission Interview
Transcript, Bunn, W., April 17, 1986, Washington, D.C., pages
42-43

3. Commission Interview
Transcript, Silveira, M., April 16, 1986, Washington, D.C., page
4.

4. Commission Interview
Transcript, Quong, H., April 11. 1986, Washington, D.C, , pages
29-30.

5. Commission Work
Session, March 25, 1986, JSC, page 84.

6. Commission Interview
Transcript, Bunn, W., April 17, 1986, Washington, D.C., page
89.

7. SRB Critical Items
List, Change 2, November 30, 1983, page A6 -A

8. Space Shuttle
Program Requirements Control Board Directive-Level II, PRCBD
Number 501152A, JSC, April 4, 1975, pages 2-4

9. Space Shuttle
Program Requirements Control Board Directive-Level II, PRCBD
Number 521701R2, JSC, March 7, 1983, pages 1 -6.

10. Letter from Martin
L. Raines, JSC, ND5/86-M 121, May 19, 1986.

11. Space Shuttle
Program Manager Directive 34E, September 3, 1982, page 2.

12. Letter from Glynn
Lunney, JSC, WA-81-LO38, October 20, 1981.

13. Commission
Interview Transcript, Bunn, W., April 17, 1986, Washington, D.C.,
page 4

14. Commission
Interview Transcript, Bunn, W, April 17, 1986, Washington, D.C.,
page 41.

15. Commission
Interview Transcript, Bunn, W., April 17, 1986, Washington, D.C.,
page 13.

16. Commission
Interview Transcript, Moore, J., April 8, 1986, NASA Headquarters,
page 19.

17. Marshall Space
Flight Center Record Number AO9288, February 26, 1986, page
2.

18. Commission
Interview Transcript, Bunn, W., April 17, 1986, Washington, D.C.,
pages 85-86.

19. Commission
Interview Transcript, Bunn, W., April 17, 1986, Washington, D.C.,
pages 78-79.

20. Commission Hearing
Transcript, April 3, 1986, page 2552.

21. Marshall Space
Flight Center Record Number A07934, March 7, 1986, page 6.

22. Annual Report,
Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, 1974, page 4.

23. Report, "Space
Shuttle Crew- Safety Panel History," JSC, April 16, 1986, pages
4-6.

24. Space Shuttle
Program Directive 4A. JSC. April 17, 1974, page 1.

