

v1ch5

Report of the PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION
on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident

Chapter V: The Contributing Cause
of The Accident.

[ 82 ] The decision to
launch the Challenger was flawed. Those who made that decision were
unaware of the recent history of problems concerning the O-rings and
the joint and were unaware of the initial written recommendation of
the contractor advising against the launch at temperatures below 53
degrees Fahrenheit and the continuing opposition of the engineers at
Thiokol after the management reversed its position. They did not have
a clear understanding of Rockwell's concern that it was not safe to
launch because of ice on the pad. If the decisionmakers had known all
of the facts, it is highly unlikely that they would have decided to
launch 51-L on January 28, 1986.

Flaws In The Decision Making
Process

In addition to analyzing all available
evidence concerning the material causes of the accident on January
28, the Commission examined the chain of decisions that culminated in
approval of the launch. It concluded that the decision making process
was flawed in several ways. The actual events that produced the
information upon which the approval of launch was based are recounted
and appraised in the sections of this chapter. The discussion that
follows relies heavily on excerpts from the testimony of those
involved in the management judgments that led to the launch of the
Challenger under conditions described.

That testimony reveals failures in
communication that resulted in a decision to launch 51-L based on
incomplete and sometimes misleading information, a conflict between
engineering data and management judgments, and a NASA management
structure that permitted internal flight safety problems to bypass
key Shuttle managers.

The Shuttle Flight Readiness Review is a
carefully planned, step-by-step activity, established by NASA program
directive SPO-PD 710.5A, 1 designed to certify the readiness of all components of
the Space Shuttle assembly. The process is focused upon the Level I
Flight Readiness Review, held approximately two weeks before a
launch. The Level I review is a conference chaired by the NASA
Associate Administrator for Space Flight and supported by the NASA
Chief Engineer, the Program Manager, the center directors and project
managers from Johnson, Marshall and Kennedy, along with senior
contractor representatives.

The formal portion of the process is initiated
by directive from the Associate Administrator for Space Flight. The
directive outlines the schedule for the Level I Flight Readiness
Review and for the steps that precede it. The process begins at Level
IV with the contractors formally certifying-in writing-the flight
readiness of the elements for which they are responsible.
Certification is made to the appropriate Level III NASA project
managers at Johnson and Marshall. Additionally, at Marshall the
review is followed by a presentation directly to the Center Director.
At Kennedy the Level III review, chaired by the Center Director,
verifies readiness of the launch support elements.

The next step in the process is the
Certification of Flight Readiness to the Level II Program Manager at
Johnson. In this review each Space Shuttle program element endorses
that it has satisfactorily completed the manufacture,
[ 83 ]
assembly, test and checkout of the pertinent element, including the
contractors" certification that design and performance are up to
standard. The Flight Readiness Review process culminates in the Level
I review.

In the initial notice of the review, the Level
I directive establishes a Mission Management Team for the particular
mission. The team assumes responsibility for each Shuttle's readiness
for a period commencing 48 hours before launch and continuing through
post-landing crew egress and the safing of the Orbiter. On call
throughout the entire period, the Mission Management Team supports
the Associate Administrator for Space Flight and the Program
Manager.

A structured Mission Management Team
meeting-called L-1-is held 24 hours, or one day, prior to each
scheduled launch. Its agenda includes closeout of any open work, a
closeout of any Flight Readiness Review action items, a discussion of
new or continuing anomalies, and an updated briefing on anticipated
weather conditions at the launch site and at the abort landing sites
in different parts of the world. It is standard practice of Level-I
and II officials to encourage the reporting of new problems or
concerns that might develop in the interval between the Flight
Readiness Review and the L-1 meeting, and between the L-1 and
launch.

In a procedural sense, the process
described...

Readiness reviews for both the launch
and the flight of a Shuttle mission are conducting at ascending
levels that begin with contractors. Note: See Chart on page 102
for description of management "levels" and organization chain of
command.

[ 84 ]....was followed in
the case of flight 51 -L. However, in the launch preparation for 51-L
relevant concerns of Level III NASA personnel and element contractors
were not, in the following crucial areas, adequately communicated to
the NASA Level I and II management responsible for the launch:

The objections to launch voiced by Morton
Thiokol c engineers about the detrimental effect of cold
temperatures on the performance of' the Solid Rocket Motor joint
seal.

The degree of concern of Thiokol and
Marshall about the erosion of the joint seals in prior Shuttle
flights, notably 51-C (January, 1985) and 51-B (April,
1985).

On December 13, 1985, the Associate
Administrator for Space flight, Jesse Moore, sent out a message
distributed among NASA Headquarters, NASA field centers, and U.S. Air
Force units, that scheduled the Flight Readiness Review for January
15, 1986, and prescribed the dates for the other steps in the
standard procedure.

The message was followed by directives from
James A. (Gene) Thomas, Deputy Director of Launch and Landing
Operations at Kennedy on January 2, 1986; by the National Space
Transportation System Program Manager, Arnold Aldrich, on January 3;
by William R. Lucas, the Marshall Center Director, on January 7; and
by the Marshall Shuttle Projects Office on January 8. Each of these
implementing directives prescribed for Level III the preparatory
steps for the Flight Readiness Review.

The Flight Readiness Review was held, as
scheduled, on January 15. On the following day, Aldrich issued the
schedule for the combined Level I/Mission Management Team meetings;
he also announced plans for the Mission Management Team meetings
continuing throughout the mission and included the schedule for the
L-1 review.

On January 23, Moore issued a directive
stating that the Flight Readiness Review had been conducted on the
15th and that 51-L was ready to fly pending closeout of open work,
satisfactory countdown, and completion of remaining Flight Readiness
Review action items, which were to be closed out during the L-1
meeting. No problems with the Solid Rocket Booster were
identified.

Since December, 1982, the O-rings had been
designated a "Criticality 1" feature of the Solid...

The NASA Asscociate Administrator for
Space Flight issued this notice of scheduling of the Flight Readiness
Review for mission 51-L.

....Rocket Booster design, a term denoting a
failure point-without back-up-that could cause a loss of 'life or
vehicle if' the component fails. In July 1985, after a nozzle joint
on STS 51-B showed erosion of a secondary O-ring, indicating that the
primary seal failed, a launch constraint was placed on flight 51-F
and subsequent launches. These constraints had been imposed and
regularly waived by the Solid Rocket Booster Project Manager at
Marshall, Lawrence B. Mulloy.

Neither the launch constraint, the reason for
it, or the six consecutive waivers prior to 51-L were known to Moore
(Level I) or Aldrich (Level II) or Thomas at the time of the Flight
Readiness Review process for 51-L.

It should be noted that there were other and
independent paths of system reporting that were designed to bring
forward information about the Solid Rocket Booster joint anomalies.
One path was the task force of Thiokol engineers and [ 85 ] Marshall engineers
who had been conducting subscale pressure tests at Wasatch during
1985, a source of documented rising concern and frustration on the
part of some of the Thiokol participants and a few of the Marshall
participants. But Level II was not in the line of reporting for this
activity. Another path was the examination at each Flight Readiness
Review of evidence of earlier flight anomalies. For 51-L, the data
presented in this latter path, while it reached Levels I and II,
never referred to either test anomalies or flight anomalies with
O-rings.

In any event, no mention of the O-ring
problems in the Solid Rocket Booster joint appeared in the
Certification of Flight Readiness, signed for Thiokol on January 9,
1986, by Joseph Kilminster, for the Solid Rocket Booster set
designated BI026. 2

Similarly, no mention appeared in the
certification endorsement, signed on January 15, 1986, by Kilminster
and by Mulloy, 3 No mention appears in several inches of paper
comprising the entire chain of readiness reviews for
51-L. 4

In the 51-L readiness reviews, it appears that
neither Thiokol management nor the Marshall Level III project
managers believed that the O-ring blow-by and erosion risk was
critical. The testimony and contemporary correspondence show that
Level III believed there was ample margin to fly with O-ring erosion,
provided the leak check was performed at 200 pounds per square
inch.

Following the January 15 Flight Readiness
Review each element of the Shuttle was certified as
flight-ready.

The L- 1 Mission Management Team meeting took
place as scheduled at 11:00 a.m. Eastern Standard Time January 25. No
technical issues appeared at this meeting or in the documentation and
all Flight Readiness Review actions were reported closed out.

Mr. Mulloy testified as follows regarding the
Flight Readiness Review record about O-ring concerns:
5

Chairman Rogers : . . . Why wasn't that a cause for concern on the part
of the whole NASA organization?

Mr. Mulloy:
It was cause for concern, sir.

Chairman Rogers : Who did you tell about this?

Mr. Mulloy :
Everyone, sir.

Chairman Rogers : And they all knew about it at the time of
51-L?

Mr. Mulloy :
Yes, sir. You will find in the Flight Readiness Review record that
went all the way to the L-1 review.

It is disturbing to the Commission that
contrary to the testimony of the Solid Rocket Booster Project
Manager, the seriousness of concern was not conveyed in Flight
Readiness Review to Level I and the 51-L readiness review was
silent.

The only remaining issue facing the Mission
Management Team at the L-1 review was the approaching cold front,
with forecasts of rain showers and temperatures in the mid-sixties.
There had also been heavy rain since 51-L had been rolled out to the
launch pad, approximately seven inches compared with the 2.5 inches
that would have been normal for that season and length of exposure
(35 days).

At 12:36 p.m. on the 27th, the Mission
Management Team scrubbed the launch for that day due to high cross
winds at the launch site. In the accompanying discussion that ran for
about half an hour, all appropriate personnel were polled as to the
feasibility of a launch within 24 hours. Participants were requested
to identify any constraints. This meeting, aimed at launch at 9:38
a.m. On January 28, produced no constraints or concerns about the
performance of the Solid Rocket Boosters.

At 2:00 p.m. on the 27th, the Mission
Management Team met again. At that time, the weather was expected to
clear, but it appeared that temperatures would be in the low twenties
for about 11 hours. Issues were raised with regard to the cold
weather effects on the launch facility, including the water drains,
the eye wash and shower water, fire suppression system, and
overpressure water trays. It was decided to activate heaters in the
Orbiter, but no concerns were expressed about the O-rings in the
Solid Rocket Boosters. The decision was to proceed with the countdown
and with fueling, but all members of the team were asked to review
the situation and call if any problems arose.

At approximately 2:30 p.m. EST, at Thiokol's
Wasatch plant, Robert Ebeling, after learning of the predicted low
temperature for launch, convened a meeting with Roger Boisjoly and
with other Thiokol engineers. A brief chronology of the subsequent
chain of events begins on page 104. Ebeling was concerned about
predicted cold [ 86 ] temperatures at Kennedy Space Center. In a
post-accident interview, Mr. Ebeling recalled the substance of the
meeting. 6

"The meeting lasted one hour, but
the conclusion of that meeting was Engineering-especially Arnie,
Roger Boisjoly, Brian Russell, myself, Jerry Burns, they come to
mind-were very adamant about their concerns on this lower
temperature, because we were way below our data base and we were way
below what we qualified for."

Later in the afternoon on the same day, Allan
McDonald-Thiokol's liaison for the Solid Rocket Booster project at
Kennedy Space Center- received a telephone call from Ebeling,
expressing concern about the performance of the Solid Rocket Booster
field joints at low temperatures. During testimony before the
Commission on February 27, McDonald recounted that
conversation: 7

Mr. McDonald : Well, I had first become aware of the concern of the
low temperatures that were projected for the Cape, it was late in the
afternoon of the 27th. I was at Carver Kennedy's house. He is a vice
president of, as I mentioned, our space operations center at the
Cape, and supports the stacking of the SRMs [Solid Rocket
Motors].

And I had a call from Bob Ebeling. He is the
manager of our ignition system an final assembly, and he worked for
me as program manager at Thiokol in Utah. And he called me and said
that they had just received some word earlier that the weatherman was
projecting temperatures as low as 18 degrees Fahrenheit some time in
the early morning hours of the 28th, and that they had some meetings
with some of the engineering people and had some concerns about the
O-rings getting to those kinds of temperatures.

And he wanted to make me aware of that and
also wanted to get some more updated and better information on what
the actual temperature was going to be depicted, so that they could
make some calculations on what they expected the real temperature the
O-rings may see....

I told him that I would get that temperature
data for him and call him back. Carver Kennedy then, when I hung up,
called the launch operations center to get the predicted temperatures
from pad B, as well as what the temperature history had been during
the day up until that time.

. . . He obtained those temperatures from the
launch operations center, and they basically said that they felt it
was going to get near freezing or freezing before midnight. It would
get as low as 22 degrees as a minimum in the early morning hours,
probably around 6:00 o'clock, and that they were predicting a
temperature of about 26 degrees at the intended time, about 9:38 the
next morning.

I took that data and called back to the plant
and sent it to Bob Ebeling and relayed that to him, and told him he
ought to use this temperature data for his predictions, but I thought
this was very serious and to make sure that he had the vice
president, engineering, involved in this and all of his people; that
I wanted them to put together some calculations and a presentation of
material.

Chairman Rogers : Who's the Vice President, Engineering?

Mr. McDonald : Mr. Bob Lund is our Vice President, Engineering, at
our Morton Thiokol facility in Utah.

To make sure he was involved in this, and that
this decision should be an engineering decision, not a program
management decision. And I told him that I would like him to make
sure they prepared some charts and were in a position to recommend
the launch temperature and to have the rationale for supporting that
launch temperature.

I then hung up and I called Mr. Mulloy. He was
staying at the Holiday Inn in Merritt Island and they couldn't reach
him, and so I called Cecil Houston-Cecil Houston is the resident
manager for the Marshall Space Flight Center office at KSC [Kennedy
Space Center]-and told him about our concerns with the low
temperatures and the potential problem with the O-rings.

And he said that he would set up a
teleconference. He had a four-wire system next to his office. His
office is right across from the VAB [Vehicle Assembly Building] in
the trailer complex C over there. And he would set up a four-wire
teleconference involving the engineering people at Marshall Space
Flight Center at Huntsville, our people back at Thiokol in Utah; and
that I [ 87] should come down to his office and participate at
Kennedy from there, and that he would get back with me and let me
know when that time would be.

Soon thereafter Cecil Houston called Dr.
Judson Lovingood, Deputy Shuttle Project Manager at Marshall Space
Flight Center, to inform him of the concerns about the O-rings and
asked Lovingood to set up a teleconference with senior project
management personnel, with George Hardy, Marshall's Deputy Director
of Science and Engineering, and with Morton Thiokol personnel.
Lovingood called Stanley Reinartz, Shuttle Project Manager, a few
minutes later and informed him of the planned telecon.

The first phase of the teleconference began at
5:45 p. m. Eastern Standard Time; participants included Reinartz,
Lovingood, Hardy, and numerous people at Kennedy, Marshall and
Thiokol-Wasatch. (Allen McDonald missed this phase; he did not arrive
at Kennedy until after 8:00 p.m.) Concerns for the effect of low
temperature on the O-rings and the joint seal were presented by
Morton Thiokol, along with an opinion that launch should be delayed.
A recommendation was also made that Aldrich, Program Manager at
Johnson (Level II), be informed of these concerns.

The following are excerpts from testimony
before the Commission relating to the teleconference:
8

Dr. Keel : You just indicated earlier that, based upon that
teleconference, you thought there was a good possibility of delay. Is
that what Thiokol was recommending then, was delay?

Dr. Lovingood : That is the way I heard it, and they were talking
about the 51-C experience and the fact that they had experienced the
worst case blow-by as far as the arc and the soot and so forth. And
also, they talked about the resiliency data that they had.

So it appeared to me-and we didn't have all of
the proper people there. That was another aspect of this. It appeared
to me that we had better sit down and get the data so that we could
understand exactly what they were talking about and assess that
data.

And that is why I suggested that we go ahead
and have a telecon within the center, so that we could review
that.

Dr. Keel : So
as early as after that first afternoon conference at 5:45, it
appeared that Thiokol was basically saying delay. Is that
right?

Dr. Lovingood : That is the way it came across to me. I don't know
how other people perceived it, but that's the way it came across to
me.

Dr. Keel :
Mr. Reinartz, how did you perceive It?

Mr. Reinartz : I did not perceive it that way. I perceived that they
were raising some questions and issues which required looking into by
all the right parties, but I did not perceive it as a recommendation
delay.

Dr. Keel :
Some prospects for delay?

Mr. Reinartz : Yes, sir, that possibility is always there.

Dr. Keel :
Did you convey that to Mr. Mulloy and Mr. Hardy before the 8:15
conference?

Mr. Reinartz : Yes, I did. And as a matter of fact, we had a
discussion. Mr. Mulloy was just out of communication for about an
hour, and then after that I got in contact with him, and we both had
a short discussion relating to the general nature of the concerns
with Dr. Lucas and Mr. Kingsbury at the motel before we both departed
for the telecon that we had set up out at the Cape.

Dr. Keel :
But based upon that, Mr. Lovingood, that impression, you thought it
was a significant enough possibility that Mr. Aldrich should have
been contacted?

Dr. Lovingood : Yes.

Dr. Keel : In
addition, did you recommend that Mr. Lucas, who is director of
Marshall, of course, and Mr. Kingsbury, who is Mr. Hardy's boss,
participate in the 8:15 conference?

Dr. Lovingood: Yes, I did.

Dr. Keel :
And you recommended that to whom?

Dr. Lovingood : I believe I said that over the net. I said that I
thought we ought to have an inter-center meeting involving Dr. Lucas
and Mr. Kingsbury, and then plan to go on up the line to Level II and
Level I.

And then it was after we broke off that first
telecon I called Stan at the motel and told [ 88 ] him that he ought to
go ahead and alert Arnie to that possibility.

Dr. Keel :
And Mr. Reinartz, you then visited the motel room of Mr. Lucas with
Mr. Kingsbury, and also was Mr. Mulloy with you then?

Mr. Reinartz : Yes, sir, he was. In the first couple of minutes I
believe I was there by myself, and then Mr. Mulloy joined us.

Dr. Keel :
And did you discuss with them Mr. Lovingood's recommendation that the
two of them, Lucas and Kingsbury, participate?

Mr. Reinartz : No, sir. I don't recall discussing Mr. Lovingood's
recommendations. I discussed with them the nature of the telecon, the
nature of the concerns raised by Thiokol, and the plans to gather the
proper technical support people at Marshall for examination of the
data. And I believe that was the essence of the discussion.

Chairman Rogers : But you didn't recommend that the information be
given to Level II or Level I?

Mr. Reinartz : I don't recall that I raised that issue with Dr.
Lucas. I told him what the plans were for proceeding. I don't recall,
Mr. Chairman, making any statement regarding that.

Mr. Hotz :
Mr. Reinartz, are you telling us that you in fact are the person who
made the decision not to escalate this to a Level II item?

Mr. Reinartz : That is correct, sir.

At approximately 8:45 p.m. Eastern Standard
Time, Phase 2 of the teleconference commenced, the Thiokol charts and
written data having arrived at Kennedy Space Center by telefax. (A
table of teleconference participants is included with Chronology of
Events.) The charts presented a history of the O-ring erosion and
blow-by in the Solid Rocket Booster joints of previous flights,
presented the results of subscale testing at Thiokol and the results
of static tests of Solid Rocket Motors. In the following testimony,
Roger Boisjoly, Allan McDonald and Larry Mulloy expressed their
recollections of this teleconference up to the point when an off-net
caucus was requested: 9

Mr. Boisjoly: I expressed deep concern about launching at low
temperature. I presented Chart 2-1 with emphasis-now, 2-1, if you
want to see it, I have it, but basically that was the chart that
summarized the primary concerns, and that was the chart that I pulled
right out of the Washington presentation without changing one word of
it because it was still applicable, and it addresses the highest
concern of the field joint in both the ignition transient condition
and the steady state condition, and it really sets down the rationale
for why we were continuing to fly. Basically, if erosion penetrates
the primary O-ring seal, there is a higher probability of no
secondary seal capability in the steady state condition. And I had
two sub-bullets under that which stated bench testing showed O-ring
not capable of maintaining contact with metal parts, gap, opening
rate to maximum operating pressure. I had another bullet which stated
bench testing showed capability to maintain O-ring contact during
initial phase (0 to 170 milliseconds of transient). That was my
comfort basis of continuing to fly under normal circumstances, normal
being within the data base we had.

I emphasized, when I presented that chart
about the changing of the timing function of the O-ring as it
attempted to seal. I was concerned that we may go from that first
beginning region into that intermediate region, from O to 170 being
the first region, and 170 to 330 being the intermediate region where
we didn't have a high probability of sealing or seating.

I then presented Chart 2-2 with added concerns
related to the timing function. And basically on that chart, I
started off talking about a lower temperature than current data base
results in changing the primary O-ring sealing timing function, and I
discussed the SRM-15 [Flight 51-C, January, 1985] observations,
namely, the 15A [Left SRM, Flight 51-C] motor had 80 degrees arc
black grease between the O-rings, and make no mistake about it, when
I say black, I mean black just like coal. It was jet black. And
SRM-15B [Right SRM, Flight 51-C] had a 110 degree arc of black grease
between the O-rings. We would have low O-ring squeeze due to
low.....

Chart 2-1 [Left] presented by
Thiokol's Roger Boisjoly summarizing primary concerns with the field
joint and its O-ring seals on the boosters.

Boisjoly's Chart 2-2 [Right]
indicating concern about temperature effect on seal actuation time
(handwritten).

[ 89 ] ....temperature
which I calculated earlier in the day. We should have higher O-ring
Shore hardness.

Now, that would be harder. And what that
material really is, it would be likened to trying to shove a brick
into a crack versus a sponge. That is a good analogy for purposes of
this discussion. I also mentioned that thicker grease, as a result of
lower temperatures, would have a higher viscosity. It wouldn't be as
slick and slippery as it would be at room temperature. And so it
would be a little bit more difficult to move across it.

We would have higher O-ring pressure actuation
time, in my opinion, and that is what I presented.... These are the
sum and substance of what I just presented. If action time increases,
then the threshold of secondary seal pressurization capability is
approached. That was my fear. If the threshold is reached, then
secondary seal may not be capable of being pressurized, and that was
the bottom line of everything that had been presented up to that
point.

Chairman Rogers : Did anybody take issue with you?

Mr. Boisjoly : Well, I am coming to that. I also showed a chart of
the joint with an exaggerated cross section to show the seal lifted
off, which has been shown to everybody. I was asked, yes, at that
point in time I was asked to quantify my concerns, and I said I
couldn't. I couldn't quantify it. I had no data to quantify it, but I
did say I knew that it was away from goodness in the current data
base. Someone on the net commented that we had soot blow-by on SRM-22
[Flight 61-A, October, 1985] which was launched at 75 degrees. I
don't remember who made the comment, but that is where the first
comment came in about the disparity between my conclusion and the
observed data because SRM-22 [Flight 61-A, October, 1985] had blow-by
at essentially a room temperature launch.

I then said that SRM-15 [Flight 51-C, January,
1985] had much more blow-by indication and that it was indeed telling
us that lower temperature was a factor. This was supported by
inspection of flown hardware by myself. I was asked again for data to
support my claim, and I said I have none other than what is being
presented, and I had been trying to get resilience data, Arnie and I
both, since last October, and that statement was mentioned on the
net.

Others in the room presented their charts, and
the main telecon session concluded with Bob Lund, who is our Vice
President of....

Initial Thikol recommendation Chart
presented by Robert K. Lund at second teleconference prior to Thiolol
caucus.

[ 90 ] ....Engineering,
presenting his conclusions and recommendations charts which were
based on our data input up to that point. Listeners on the telecon
were not pleased with the conclusions and the recommendations.

Chairman Rogers : What was the conclusion ?

Mr. Boisjoly : The conclusion was we should not fly outside of our
data base, which was 53 degrees. Those were the conclusions. And we
were quite pleased because we knew in advance, having participated in
the preparation, what the conclusions were, and we felt very
comfortable with that.

Mr. Acheson :
Who presented that conclusion?

Mr. Boisjoly : Mr. Bob Lund. He had prepared those charts. He had
input from other people. He had actually physically prepared the
charts. It was about that time that Mr. Hardy from Marshall was asked
what he thought about the MTI [Morton Thiokol] recommendation, and he
said he was appalled at the MTI decision. Mr. Hardy was also asked
about launching, and he said no, not if the contractor recommended
not launching, he would not go against the contractor and
launch.

There was a short discussion that ensued about
temperature not being a discriminator between SRM-15 [Flight 51-C]
and SRM-22 [Flight 61-A], and shortly after, I believe it was Mr.
Kilminster asked if- excuse me. I'm getting confused here. Mr.
Kilminster was asked by NASA if he would launch, and he said no
because the engineering recommendation was not to launch.

Then MTI management then asked for a
five-minute caucus. I'm not sure exactly who asked for that, but it
was asked in such a manner that I remember it was asked for, a
five-minute caucus, which we put on- the line on mute and went
off-line with the rest of the net.

Chairman Rogers : Mr. Boisjoly, at the time that you made the-that
Thiokol made the recommendation not to launch, was that the unanimous
recommendation as far as you knew?

Mr. Boisjoly : Yes. I have to make something clear. I have been
distressed by the things that have been appearing in the paper and
things that have been said in general, and there was never one
positive, pro-launch statement ever made by anybody. There have been
some feelings since then that folks have expressed that they would
support the decision, but there was not one positive statement for
launch ever made in that room.

Mr. McDonald's testimony: 10

Mr. McDonald : I arrived at the Kennedy Space Center at about 8:15
[p.m.], and when I arrived there at the Kennedy Space Center the
others that had already arrived were Larry Mulloy, who was there-he
is the manager, the project manager for the SRB for Marshall. Stan
Reinartz was there and he is the manager of the Shuttle Project
Office. He's Larry Mulloy's boss.

Cecil Houston was there, the resident manager
for Marshall. And Jack Buchanan was there. He happens to be our
manager, Morton Thiokol's manager of our launch support services
office at Kennedy.

The telecon hadn't started yet. It came on
[ 91 ] the
network shortly after I got there. .

Chairman Rogers : Was it essentially a telephone conference or was
there actually a network of pictures?

Mr. McDonald : It was a telephone conference....

But I will relay . . . what I heard at the
conference as best I can. The teleconference started I guess close to
9:00 o'clock and, even though all the charts weren't there, we were
told to begin and that Morton Thiokol should take the lead and go
through the charts that they had sent to both centers.

The charts were presented by the engineering
people from Thiokol, in fact by the people that had made those
particular charts. Some of them were typed, some of them were
handwritten. And they discussed their concerns with the low
temperatures relative to the possible effects on the O-rings,
primarily the timing function to seal the 0rings.

They presented a history of some of the data
that we had accumulated both in static test and in flight tests
relative to temperatures and the performance of the 0rings, and
reviewed the history of all of our erosion studies of the O-rings, in
the field joints, any blow-by of the primary O-ring with soot or
products of combustion or decomposition that we had noted, and the
performance of the secondary O-rings.

And there was an exchange amongst the
technical people on that data as to what it meant . . . But the real
exchange never really came until the conclusions and recommendations
came in.

At that point in time, our vice president, Mr.
Bob Lund, presented those charts and he presented the charts on the
conclusions and recommendations. And the bottom line was that the
engineering people would not recommend a launch below 53 degrees
Fahrenheit. The basis for that recommendation was primarily our
concern with the launch that had occurred about a year earlier, in
January of 1985, I believe it was 51-C.

Mr. Mulloy's testimony: 11

Mr. Mulloy : That telecon was a little late starting. It was
intended to be set up at 8:15 . . . and the telecon was begun at
8:45.

And Thiokol will then present to you today the
data that they presented to us in that telecon. I will not do that.
The bottom line of that, though, initially was that Thiokol
engineering, Bob Lund, who is the Vice President and Director of
Engineering, who is here today, recommended that 51-L not be launched
if the O-ring temperatures predicted at launch time would be lower
than any previous launch, and that was 53 degrees.

Dr. Walker :
May I ask a question? I wish you would distinguish between the
predicted bulk temperatures and the O-ring temperatures. In fact, as
I understand it, you really don't have any official O-ring
temperature prediction in your models, and it seems that the
assumption has been that the O-ring temperature is the same as the
bulk temperature, which we know is not the case.

Mr. Mulloy :
You will see, sir, in the Thiokol presentation today that that is not
the case. This was a specific calculation of what the O-ring
temperature was on the day of the January 1985 launch. It is not the
bulk temperature of the propellant, nor is it the ambient temperature
of the air.

It was Thiokol's calculation of what the
lowest temperature an O-ring had seen in previous flights, and the
engineering recommendation was that we should not move outside of
that experience base.

I asked Joe Kilminster, who is the program
manager for the booster program at Thiokol, what his recommendation
was, because he is the gentleman that I get my recommendations from
in the program office. He stated that, based on that engineering
recommendation, that he could not recommend launch.

At that point I restated, as I have testified
to, the rationale that was essentially documented in the 1982
Critical Items List, that stated that the rationale had been that we
were flying with a simplex joint seal. And you will see in the
Thiokol presentation that the context of their presentation is that
the primary ring, with the reduced temperatures and reduced
resiliency, may not function as [ 92 ] a primary seal and
we would be relying on secondary.

And without getting into their rationale and
getting ahead, the point, the bottom line, is that we were
continuing-the assessment was, my assessment at that time was, that
we would have an effective simplex seal, based upon the engineering
data that Thiokol had presented, and that none of those engineering
data seemed to change that basic rationale.

Stan Reinartz then asked George Hardy, the
Deputy Director of Science and Engineering at Marshall, what his
opinion was. George stated that he agreed that the engineering data
did not seem to change this basic rationale, but also stated on the
telecon that he certainly would not recommend launching if Thiokol
did not.

At that time Joe Kilminster requested a five
minute off-net caucus, and that caucus lasted approximately 30
minutes.

The teleconference was recessed at
approximately 10:30 p.m. Eastern Standard Time. The off-net caucus of
Thiokol personnel started and continued for about 30 minutes at the
Wasatch office. The major issues, according to the testimony of Jerry
Mason, Senior Vice President for Wasatch Operations, were the effect
of temperature upon the O-rings and the history of erosion of the
O-rings: 12

Mr. Mason : Now, in the caucus we revisited all of our previous
discussions, and the important things that came out of that was that,
as we had recognized, we did have the possibility that the primary
O-ring might be slower to move into the seating position and that was
our concern, and that is what we had focused on originally.

The fact that we couldn't show direct
correlation with the O-ring temperature was discussed, but we still
felt that there was some concern about it being colder.

We then recognized that, if the primary did
move more slowly, that we could get some blow-by and erosion on the
primary. But we had pointed out to us in that caucus a point that had
not come across clearly in our earlier discussions, and that is that
we had run tests where we deliberately cut large pieces out of the
O-rings to see what the threshold of sealing was, and we found we
could go to 125 thousandths of a cut out of the O-ring and it would
still seal.

Approximately 10 engineers participated in the
caucus, along with Mason, Kilminster, C. G. Wiggins (Vice President,
Space Division), and Lund. Arnold Thompson and Boisjoly voiced very
strong objections to launch, and the suggestion in their testimony
was that Lund was also reluctant to launch: 13

Mr. Boisjoly : Okay, the caucus started by Mr. Mason stating a
management decision was necessary. Those of us who opposed the launch
continued to speak out, and I am specifically speaking of Mr.
Thompson and myself because in my recollection he and I were the only
ones that vigorously continued to oppose the launch. And we were
attempting to go back and rereview and try to make clear what we were
trying to get across, and we couldn't understand why it was going to
be reversed. So we spoke out and tried to explain once again the
effects of low temperature. Arnie actually got up from his position
which was down the table, and walked up the table and put a quarter
pad down in front of the table, in front of the management folks, and
tried to sketch out once again what his concern was with the joint,
and when he realized he wasn't getting through, he just
stopped.

I tried one more time with the photos. I
grabbed the photos, and I went up and discussed the photos once again
and tried to make the point that it was my opinion from actual
observations that temperature was indeed a discriminator and we
should not ignore the physical evidence that we had observed .

And again, I brought up the point that SRM- 15
[Flight 51 -C, January, 1985] had a 110 degree arc of black grease
while SRM-22 [Flight 61-A, October, 1985] had a relatively different
amount, which was less and wasn't quite as black. I also stopped when
it was apparent that I couldn't get anybody to listen.

Dr. Walker :
At this point did anyone else speak up in favor of the launch?

Mr. Boisjoly : No, sir. No one said anything, in my recollection,
nobody said a word. It was then being discussed amongst the
management folks. After Arnie and I had [ 93 ] our last say, Mr.
Mason said we have to make a management decision. He turned to Bob
Lund and asked him to take off his engineering hat and put on his
management hat. From this point on, management formulated the points
to base their decision on. There was never one comment in favor, as I
have said, of launching by any engineer or other nonmanagement person
in the room before or after the caucus. I was not even asked to
participate in giving any input to the final decision charts.

I went back on the net with the final charts
or final chart, which was the rationale for launching, and that was
presented by Mr. Kilminster. It was hand written on a notepad, and he
read from that notepad. I did not agree with some of the statements
that were being made to support the decision. I was never asked nor
polled, and it was clearly a management decision from that
point.

I must emphasize, I had my say, and I never
[would] take [away] any management right to take the input of an
engineer and then make a decision based upon that input, and I truly
believe that. I have worked at a lot of companies, and that has been
done from time to time, and I truly believe that, and so there was no
point in me doing anything any further than I had already attempted
to do.

I did not see the final version of the chart
until the next day. I just heard it read. I left the room feeling
badly defeated, but I felt I really did all I could to stop the
launch.

I felt personally that management was under a
lot of pressure to launch and that they made a very tough decision,
but I didn't agree with it.

One of my colleagues that was in the meeting
summed it up best. This was a meeting where the determination was to
launch, and it was up to us to prove beyond a shadow of a doubt that
it was not safe to do so. This is in total reverse to what the
position usually is in a preflight conversation or a flight readiness
review. It is usually exactly opposite that.

Dr. Walker :
Do you know the source of the pressure on management that you alluded
to?

Mr. Boisjoly : Well, the comments made over the [net] is what I
felt, I can't speak for them, but I felt it-I felt the tone of the
meeting exactly as I summed up, that we were being put in a position
to prove that we should not launch rather than being put in the
position and prove that we had enough data to launch. And I felt that
very real.

Dr. Walker :
These were the comments from the NASA people at Marshall and at
Kennedy Space Center? Mr. Boisjoly: Yes. Dr. Feynman: I take it you
were trying to find proof that the seal would fail?

Mr. Boisjoly : Yes.

Dr. Feynman :
And of course, you didn't, you couldn't, because five of them didn't,
and if you had proved that they would have all failed, you would have
found yourself incorrect because five of them didn't fail.

Mr. Boisjoly : That is right. I was very concerned that the cold
temperatures would change that timing and put us in another regime,
and that was the whole basis of my fighting that night.

As appears from the foregoing, after the
discussion between Morton Thiokol management and the engineers, a
final management review was conducted by Mason, Lund, Kilminster, and
Wiggins. Lund and Mason recall this review as an unemotional,
rational discussion of the engineering facts as they knew them at
that time; differences of opinion as to the impact of those facts,
however, had to be resolved as a judgment call and therefore a
management decision. The testimony of Lund taken by Commission staff
investigators is as follows: 14

Mr. Lund : We tried to have the telecon, as I remember it was
about 6:00 o'clock [MST], but we didn't quite get things in order,
and we started transmitting charts down to Marshall around 6:00 or
6:30 [MST], something like that, and we were making charts in real
time and seeing the data, and we were discussing them with the
Marshall folks who went along.

We finally got the-all the charts in, and when
we got all the charts in I stood at the board and tried to draw the
conclusions that we had out of the charts that had been presented,
and we came up with a conclusions [ 94 ] chart and said that
we didn't feel like it was a wise thing to fly.

Question :
What were some of the conclusions?

Mr. Lund : I
had better look at the chart. Well, we were concerned the temperature
was going to be lower than the 50 or the 53 that had flown the
previous January, and we had experienced some blow-by, and so we were
concerned about that, and although the erosion on the O-rings, and it
wasn't critical, that, you know, there had obviously been some little
puff go through. It had been caught.

There was no real extensive erosion of that
O-ring, so it wasn't a major concern, but we said, gee, you know, we
just don't know how much further we can go below the 51 or 53 degrees
or whatever it was. So we were concerned with the unknown. And we
presented that to Marshall, and that rationale was rejected. They
said that they didn't accept that rationale, and they would like us
to consider some other thoughts that they had had.

....Mr. Mulloy said he did not accept that,
and Mr. Hardy said he was appalled that we would make such a
recommendation. And that made me ponder of what I'd missed, and so we
said, what did we miss, and Mr. Mulloy said, well, I would like you
to consider these other thoughts that we have had down here. And he
presented a very strong and forthright rationale of what they thought
was going on in that joint and how they thought that the thing was
happening, and they said, we'd like you to consider that when they
had some thoughts that we had not considered.

.....So after the discussion with Mr. Mulloy,
and he presented that, we said, well, let's ponder that a little bit,
so we went offline to talk about what we-

Question :
Who requested to go off-line?

Mr. Lund : I
guess it was Joe Kilminster.

And so we went off line on the telecon . . .
so we could have a roundtable discussion here.

Question :
Who were the management people that were there?

Mr. Lund :
Jerry Mason, Cal Wiggins, Joe, I, manager of engineering design, the
manager of applied mechanics. On the chart.

Before the Commission on February 25, 1986,
Mr. Lund testified as follows regarding why he changed his position
on launching Challenger during the management caucus when he was
asked by Mr. Mason "To take off his engineering hat and put on his
management hat": 15

Chairman Rogers : How do you explain the fact that you seemed to change
your mind when you changed your hat?

Mr. Lund : I
guess we have got to go back a little further in the conversation
than that. We have dealt with Marshall for a long time and have
always been in the position of defending our position to make sure
that we were ready to fly, and I guess I didn't realize until after
that meeting and after several days that we had absolutely changed
our position from what we had been before. But that evening I guess I
had never had those kinds of things come from the people at Marshall.
We had to prove to them that we weren't ready, and so we got
ourselves in the thought process that we were trying to find some way
to prove to them it wouldn't work, and we were unable to do that. We
couldn't prove absolutely that that motor wouldn't work.

Chairman Rogers : In other words, you honestly believed that you had a
duty to prove that it would not work?

Mr. Lund :
Well, that is kind of the mode we got ourselves into that evening. It
seems like we have always been in the opposite mode. I should have
detected that, but I did not, but the roles kind of switched.
.

Supplemental testimony of Mr. Mason obtained
in a Commission staff interview is as follows: 16

Question : Do you recall Mr. Hardy and Mr. Mulloy's comments
after-I think after Mr. Kilminster had got done, or Mr. Lund got done
presenting the charts? They had some comments. Do you recall-

Mr. Mason :
Oh, yes, it was over and over. Hardy said that, "I'm appalled at your
recommendation. ".

Question :
Well, did Mr. Hardy's n «appalled" remark and Mr. Mulloy's
"can't launch, we won't be able to launch until April"
[ 95 ]
remark, how did that affect your thinking and affect your
decision?

Mr. Mason :
My personal thinking, I just, you know, it didn't make that much
difference .

And the comments that they made, in my view,
probably had got more reaction from the engineer[s] at the lower
level than they would from the manager[s], because we deal with
people, and managers all the time....

Mr. McDonald indicated that during the period
of the internal Morton Thiokol caucus he continued to argue for delay
with Mulloy, challenging, among other things, the rationale that the
rocket motor was qualified down to 40 degrees Farhenheit. Present
were Reinartz, Jack Buchanan, the manager of Morton Thiokol Launch
Support Services at Kennedy, and Cecil Houston. McDonald's testimony
described that conversation: 17

Mr. McDonald : . . . while they were offline, reevaluating or
reassessing this data . . . I got into a dialogue with the NASA
people about such things as qualification and launch commit
criteria.

The comment I made was it is my understanding
that the motor was supposedly qualified to 40 to 90 degrees.

I've only been on the program less than three
years, but I don't believe it was. I don't believe that all of those
systems, elements, and subsystems were qualified to that
temperature.

And Mr. Mulloy said well, 40 degrees is
propellant mean bulk temperature, and we're well within that. That is
a requirement. We're at 55 degrees for that-and that the other
elements can be below that . . . that, as long as we don't fall out
of the propellant mean bulk temperature. I told him I thought that
was asinine because you could expose that large Solid Rocket Motor to
extremely low temperatures-I don't care if it's 100 below zero for
several hours-with that massive amount of propellant, which is a
great insulator, and not change that propellant mean bulk temperature
but only a few degrees, and I don't think the spec really meant
that.

But that was my interpretation because I had
been working quite a bit on the filament wound case Solid Rocket
Motor. It was my impression that the qualification temperature was 40
to 90, and I knew everything wasn't qualified to that temperature, in
my opinion. But we were trying to qualify that case itself at 40 to
90 degrees for the filament wound case.

I then said I may be naive about what
generates launch commit criteria, but it was my impression that
launch commit criteria was based upon whatever the lowest
temperature, or whatever loads, or whatever environment was imposed
on any element or subsystem of the Shuttle. And if you are operating
outside of those, no matter which one it was, then you had violated
some launch commit criteria.

That was my impression of what that was. And I
still didn't understand how NASA could accept a recommendation to fly
below 40 degrees. I could see why they took issue with the 53, but I
could never see why they would . . . of accept a recommendation below
40 degrees, even though I didn't agree that the motor was fully
qualified to 40. I made the statement that if we're wrong and
something goes wrong on this flight, I wouldn't want to have to be
the person to stand up in front of board of inquiry and say that I
went ahead and told them to go ahead and fly this thing outside what
the motor was qualified to.

I made that very statement.

Mr. Mulloy's recollections of these discussion
are as follows: 18

Mr. Mulloy : Mr. Kilminster then requested an off-net caucus. It
has been suggested, implied, or stated that we directed Thiokol to go
reconsider these data. That is not true. Thiokol asked for a caucus
so that they could consider the discussions that had ensued and the
comments that Mr. Hardy and I and others had made.

That caucus, as has been stated, was going to
start at that point, and Mr. McDonald interjected into the
teleconference. At that point, he made the first comment that he had
made during this entire teleconference.

Mr. McDonald testified for quite a while
yesterday about his thoughts on this, but he did not say any of them
until this point. At that point, he stated that he thought what
George Hardy said was a very important [ 96 ] consideration, and
that consideration was, and he asked Mr. Kilminster to be sure and
consider the comment made by George Hardy during the course of the
discussions, that the concerns expressed were for primary O-ring
blow-by and that the secondary O-ring was in a position to seal
during the time of blow-by and would do so before significant joint
rotation had occurred.

They then went into their caucus, having asked
for five minutes-

Mr. Hotz : .
. . It figures quite prominently in the discussion that you were
quoted as saying, do you expect us to wait till April to
launch?

Mr. Mulloy :
Yes, sir.

Dr. Walker :
Is that an accurate statement or not?

Mr. Mulloy :
It is certainly a statement that is out of context, and the way I
read the quote, sir-and I have seen it many times, too many times-the
quote I read was: My God, Thiokol, when do you want me to launch,
next April?

Mr. McDonald testified to another quote that
says: You guys are generating new Launch Commit Criteria.

Now, both of those I think kind of go
together, and that is what I was saying. I don't know whether that
occurred during the caucus or subsequent to. I just simply can't
remember that.

Mr. Hotz :
Well, never mind the timing.

Mr. Mulloy :
Well, yes, sir. I'm going to answer your question now. I think those
quotes derive from a single thought that may have been expressed by
me using some of those words.

I have not yet encountered anyone other than
those at KSC who heard those words, so I don't believe they were
transmitted over the net. The total context I think in which those
words may have been used is, there are currently no Launch Commit
Criteria [LCC] for joint temperature. What you are proposing to do is
to generate a new Launch Commit Criteria on the eve of launch, after
we have successfully flown with the existing Launch Commit Criteria
24 previous times. With this LCC, i.e., do not launch with a
temperature greater [sic] than 53 degrees, we may not be able to
launch until next April. We need to consider this carefully before we
jump to any conclusions.

It is all in the context, again, with
challenging your interpretation of the data, what does it mean and is
it logical, is it truly logical that we really have a system that has
to be 53 degrees to fly?

At approximately 11 p.m. Eastern Standard
Time, the Thiokol/NASA teleconference resumed, the Thiokol management
stating that they had reassessed the problem, that the temperature
effects were a concern, but that the data were admittedly
inconclusive. Kilminster read the rationale recommending launch and
stated that that was Morton Thiokol's recommendation. Hardy requested
that it be sent in writing by telefax both to Kennedy and to
Marshall, and it was. The testimony of Mulloy and Hardy regarding the
remainder of the teleconference and their rationale for recommending
launch follows: 19

Mr. Mulloy : Okay, sir. At the completion of the caucus, of
course, Mr. Kilminster came back on the loop and stated they had
assessed all the data and considered the discussions that had ensued
for the past couple of hours and the discussions that occurred during
their caucus.

Chairman Rogers : Was it a couple of hours?

Mr. Mulloy :
Yes, sir. We started at 8:45 and I believe it was probably 11:00
o'clock before he came back on the loop. It was a long discussion.
And I must emphasize that I had no knowledge of what interchange
occurred during the caucus at Thiokol, because all sites were on
mute. We were on mute at KSC. No communications occurred between
myself and Mr. Hardy at Huntsville, nor did any communication occur
between KSC and Thiokol during that caucus.

After Mr. Kilminster made that recommendation,
Mr. Reinartz then asked if there were any further comments, and to my
recollection there were none. There were no further comments
made.

I then asked Mr. Kilminster to send me a copy
of his flight readiness rationale and recommendation. The conference
was then terminated at approximately 11:15.

I have no knowledge of, as has been testified,
of Mr. McDonald being asked to sign that documentation. That would
have....

[ 97 ]

Copy of telefax sent Kennedy and
Marshall centers by Thiokol detailing the company's final position on
the January 28 launch of mission 51-L.

....been unusual, because Mr.
Kilminster signs all flight readiness documentation.

Now, after the teleconference was complete,
Mr. McDonald informed Mr. Reinartz and me that if the Thiokol
engineering concern for the effect of cold was not sufficient cause
to recommend not launching, there were two other considerations,
launch pad ice and recovery area weather.

I stated that launch pad ice had been
considered by the Mission Management Team-

Chairman Rogers : Excuse me. Could you identify that discussion, where
that took place?

Mr. Mulloy :
That was after the teleconference was completed, after Mr. Kilminster
made his recommendation, after Mr. Reinartz asked are there any other
comments. There were no other comments on the telecon from
anyone....

I stated that launch pad ice had been
considered by the Mission Management Team before deciding to proceed
and that a further periodic monitoring of that condition was planned.
I further stated that I had been made aware of the recovery area
weather previously and planned to place a call to Mr. Aldrich and
advise him that the weather in the recovery area exceeded the Launch
Commit Criteria.

So I stated earlier, when you asked what were
the Launch Commit Criteria, one of them was that the recovery area
weather has limitations on it. The report we had, that Mr. McDonald
confirmed, was that we were outside of those limits.

Now, I must point out that that is not a hard
Launch Commit Criteria. That is an advisory call, and the LCC so
states that. It does require that we discuss the condition.

So at about 11:30 p.m., Mr. Cecil Houston
established a teleconference with Mr. Aldrich and Mr. Sestile at KSC.
I informed Mr. Aldrich that the weather in the [ 98 ] recovery area could
preclude immediate recovery of the SRBs, since the ships were in a
survival mode and they were moving back toward Cape Kennedy at about
three knots, and the estimate provided to us by Mr. Sestile was that
they would be probably 40 miles from the SRB impact area at the time
of launch, at 9:38; and then, continuing at three knots, it was going
to be some period of time before they could get back and locate the
boosters.

The concern I had for that was not loss of the
total booster, but loss of the main parachutes for the booster, which
are separated at water impact, and loss of the frustum of the
boosters, which has the drogue parachute on it, which comes down
separately, because with the 50 knot winds we had out there and with
the kind of sea states we had, by the time the recovery ships got
back out there, there was little probability of being able to recover
those.

I informed Mr. Aldrich of that, and he decided
to proceed with the launch after that information. I did not discuss
with Mr. Aldrich the conversations that we had just completed with
Morton Thiokol.

Chairman Rogers : Could you explain why? Mr. Mulloy: Yes, sir. At that
time, and I still consider today, that was a Level III issue, Level
III being an SRB element or an external tank element or Space Shuttle
main engine element or an Orbiter. There was no violation of Launch
Commit Criteria. There was no waiver required in my judgment at that
time and still today.

And we work many problems at the Orbiter and
the SRB and the External Tank level that never get communicated to
Mr. Aldrich or Mr. Moore. It was clearly a Level III issue that had
been resolved.

. . . There were 27 full-scale seal tests with
an O-ring groove damage tolerances, damage in the grooves and damage
tolerance on O-rings. And then there were two cold gas tests.

And these data were presented on the night of
the 27th. All of that was at ambient temperature. And then we did
discuss what is a development qualification motor experience range,
and that is shown on the chart. We had experience everywhere from 40
to 85 degrees.

There then were data presented on two cold gas
tests at 30 degrees, where the O-ring was pressurized at the motor
pressurization rate at 30 degrees, which would indicate that an
O-ring would operate before joint rotation at 30 degrees.

Dr. Ride :
Was that actually in a joint?

Mr. Mulloy :
No, it is not. It is a full-scale O-ring, full-scale groove, in a
scaled test device, where the pressurize rate on that O-ring is zero
to 900 psi [pounds per square inch] in 600 milliseconds at a
temperature of 30 degrees.

Dr. Walker :
You would say, then, the O-ring was qualified to a temperature of 30
degrees? Would that be an accurate statement?

Mr. Mulloy :
The day that we were looking at it, on the 27th, these two tests that
we did indicated that it would perform at 30 degrees under the motor
pressurization rate before the joint rotated.

Dr. Walker :
What about, let's consider the putty and the O-ring, because that is
really the system that responds to the pressure surge. What
temperature was the putty/O-ring system qualified to?

Mr. Mulloy :
The lowest that I'm aware of-and we're still flushing this out,
because this is kind of what we talked about on the 27th, but the
lowest that I'm aware of is the 40-degree test on one of the
development motors.

Dr. Walker :
And, of course, during those tests the putty was modified before the
test. The putty was not just laid up and then the seal made. The
putty was then smoothed out or some attempt was made to remove the
volcanoes, I think.

Mr. Mulloy :
Because the horizontal assembly caused that.

Now, there's one other significant point on
this chart that we did discuss, that we didn't have the quantities on
on the 27th, and I mentioned this earlier. We have 150 case segment
proof tests, with a large number of joints with a simulation of a
cold O-ring. That is the 90 durometer with a .275, and that was at
about 35 degrees.

[ 99 ] So those are the
certification data that we kind of discussed, all of which we didn't
discuss. The two cold gas tests we did, the segment proof tests we
did, the development and qualification motor test we did, as a basis
for understanding what we could expect to happen at colder
temperatures on the joints.

Mr. Hardy testified as
follows: 20

Mr. Hardy : At the teleconference on the evening of January 27,
1986, Thiokol engineering personnel in Utah reviewed charts that had
been datafaxed to Huntsville and KSC participants just prior to the
beginning of the conference. Now, I am not going to repeat a lot of
what you have already heard, but I will give you some of my views on
the whole matter.

The presentations were professional in nature.
There were numerous questions and answers. There was a discussion of
various data and points raised by individuals at Thiokol or at
Marshall or at Kennedy. I think it was a rather full discussion.
There were some 14 charts presented, and as has been mentioned
earlier, we spent about two, two and a half hours reviewing this. To
my knowledge, anyone who desired to make a point, ask a question or
express a view was in no way restrained from doing so.

As others have mentioned, I have heard this
particular teleconference characterized as a heated discussion. I
acknowledge that there were penetrating questions that were asked, I
think, from both, from all people involved. There were various points
of view and an interpretation of the data that was exchanged. The
discussion was not, in my view, uncharacteristic of discussions on
many flight readiness issues on many previous occasions. Thiokol
engineering concluded their presentation with recommendation that the
launch time be determined consistent with flight experience to date,
and that is the launch with the O-ring temperatures at or greater
than 53 degrees Fahrenheit.

Mr. Kilminster at Thiokol stated . . . to the
best of my recollection, that with that engineering assessment, he
recommended we not launch on Tuesday morning as scheduled. After some
short discussion, Mr.

Mulloy at KSC summarized his assessment of the
data and his rationale with that data, and I think he has testified
to that.

Mr. Reinartz, who was at KSC, asked me for
comment, and I stated I was somewhat appalled, and that was referring
specifically to some of the data or the interpretation of some of the
data that Thiokol had presented with respect to its influence on the
joint seal performance relative to the issue under discussion, which
specifically was the possibility that the primary seal may take
longer to actuate and therefore to blow by the primary seal. The
blow-by of the primary seal may be longer, and I am going to
elaborate on that a little further in this statement.

Then I went on to say that I supported the
assessment of data presented essentially as summarized by Mr. Mulloy,
but I would not recommend launch over Thiokol's objections.

Somewhere about this time, Mr. Kilminster at
Utah stated that he wanted to go off the loop to caucus for about
five minutes. I believe at this point Mr. McDonald, the senior
Thiokol representative at KSC for this launch suggested to Mr.
Kilminster that he consider a point that I think I had made earlier,
that the secondary O-ring is in the proper position to seal if
blow-by of the primary O-ring occurred.

I clearly interpreted this as a somewhat
positive statement of supporting rationale for launch.... The status
of the caucus by Thiokol lasted some 30, 35 minutes. At Huntsville
during this Thiokol caucus, we continued to discuss the data
presented. We were off the loop, we were on mute. We were around a
table in small groups. It was not an organized type discussion. But I
did take that opportunity to discuss my assessment and understanding
of the data with several of my key advisors, and none of us had any
disagreement or differences in our interpretation of what we believed
the data was telling us with regard to the primary issue at
hand.

When Thiokol came back on line, Mr. Kilminster
reviewed rationale that supported proceeding with the launch and so
recommended.

[ 100 ] Mr. Reinartz asked
if anyone in the loop had a different position or disagreed or
something to that effect, with the Thiokol recommendation as
presented by Mr. Kilminster. There were no dissenting
responses.

The telecon was terminated shortly after, and
I have no knowledge of any subsequent events or discussions between
personnel at KSC or at Thiokol on this matter.

At about 5:00 a. m . on January 28, a
discussion took place among Messrs. Mulloy, Lucas, and Reinartz in
which Mulloy reported to Lucas only that there had been a discussion
with Thiokol over their concerns about temperature effects on the
O-rings, and that it had been resolved in favor of launch. The
following testimony of Mr. Mulloy and Dr. Lucas recount that
discussion: 21

General Kutyna : . . . Larry, let me follow through on that, and I am
kind of aware of the launch decision process, and you said you made
the decision at your level on this thing.

If this were an airplane, an airliner, and I
just had a two-hour argument with Boeing on whether the wing was
going to fall off or not, I think I would tell the pilot, at least
mention it.

Why didn't we escalate a decision of this
importance ?

Mr. Mulloy :
I did, sir.

General Kutyna : You did? Mr. Mulloy: Yes, sir.

General Kutyna : Tell me what levels above you.

Mr. Mulloy :
As I stated earlier, Mr. Reinartz, who is my manager, was at the
meeting, and on the morning, about 5:00 o'clock in the operations
support room where we all were I informed Dr. Lucas of the content of
the discussion.

General Kutyna : But this is not in the launch decision chain.

Mr. Mulloy :
No, sir. Mr. Reinartz is in the launch decision chain, though.

General Kutyna : And is he the highest level in that chain?

Mr. Mulloy :
No. Normally it would go from me to Mr. Reinartz to Mr. Aldrich to
Mr. Moore.

Dr. Lucas' testimony is as
follows: 22

Chairman Rogers : Would you please tell the Commission when you first
heard about the problem of the O-rings and the seals insofar as it
involves launch 51-L? And I don't want you to go way back, but go
back to when you first heard. I guess it was on January 27th, was
it?

Dr. Lucas :
Yes, sir. It was on the early evening of the 27th, I think about 7:00
p.m., when I was in my motel room along with Mr. Kingsbury. And about
that time, Mr. Reinartz and Mr. Mulloy came to my room and told me
that they had heard that some members of Thiokol had raised a concern
about the performance of the Solid Rocket Boosters in the low
temperature that was anticipated for the next day, specifically on
the seals, and that they were going out to the Kennedy Space Center
to engage in a telecon with the appropriate engineers back at
Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville and with corresponding
people back at the Wasatch division of Thiokol in Utah.

And we discussed it a few moments and I said,
fine, keep me informed, let me know what happens.

Chairman Rogers : And when was the next time you heard something about
that?

Dr. Lucas :
The next time was about 5:00 a.m. on the following morning, when I
went to the Kennedy Space Center and went to the launch control
center. I immediately saw Mr. Reinartz and Mr. Mulloy and asked them
how the matter of the previous evening was dispositioned.

Chairman Rogers : You had heard nothing at all in between?

Dr. Lucas :
No, sir.

Chairman Rogers : So from 8:00 o'clock that evening until 5:00 o'clock
in the morning, you had not heard a thing?

Dr. Lucas :
It was about 7:00, I believe, sir. But for that period of time, I
heard nothing in the interim. . .

Chairman Rogers : . . . And you heard Mr. Reinartz say he didn't think
he had to notify you, or did he notify you?

Dr. Lucas :
He told me, as I testified, when I went into the control room, that
an issue had been resolved, that there were some people
[ 101 ] at
Thiokol who had a concern about the weather, that that had been
discussed very thoroughly by the Thiokol people and by the Marshall
Space Flight Center people, and it had been concluded agreeably that
there was no problem, that he had a recommendation by Thiokol to
launch and our most knowledgeable people and engineering talent
agreed with that. So from my perspective, I didn't have-I didn't see
that as an issue.

Chairman Rogers : And if you had known that Thiokol engineers almost to
a man opposed the flight, would that have changed your view?

Dr. Lucas :
I'm certain that it would.

Chairman Rogers : So your testimony is the same as Mr. Hardy's. Had he
known, he would not have recommended the flight be launched on that
day.

Dr. Lucas : I
didn't make a recommendation one way or the other. But had I known
that, I would have then interposed an objection, yes.

Chairman Rogers : I gather you didn't tell Mr. Aldrich or Mr. Moore
what Mr. Reinartz had told you?

Dr. Lucas :
No, sir. That is not the reporting channel. Mr. Reinartz reports
directly to Mr. Aldrich. In a sense, Mr. Reinartz informs me as the
institutional manager of the progress that he is making in
implementing his program, but that I have never on any occasion
reported to Mr. Aldrich.

Chairman Rogers : And you had subsequent conversations with Mr. Moore
and Mr. Aldrich prior to the flight and you never mentioned what Mr.
Reinartz had told you? Dr. Lucas: I did not mention what Mr. Reinartz
told me, because Mr. Reinartz had indicated to me there was not an
issue, that we had a unanimous position between Thiokol and the
Marshall Space Flight Center, and there was no issue in his judgment,
nor in mine as he explained it to me. Chairman Rogers: But had you
known, your attitude would have been totally different?

Dr. Lucas :
Had I had the advantage at that time of the testimony that I have
heard here this week, I would have had a different attitude,
certainly.

Chairman Rogers : In view of the fact that you were running tests to
improve the joint, didn't the fact that the weather was so bad and
Reinartz had told you about the questions that had been raised by
Thiokol, at least, didn't that cause you serious concern? Dr. Lucas:
I would have been concerned if Thiokol had come in and said, we don't
think you should launch because we've got bad weather.

Chairman Rogers : Well, that's what they did, of course, first. That is
exactly what they did. You didn't know that?

Dr. Lucas : I
knew only that Thiokol had raised a concern.

Chairman Rogers : Did you know they came and recommended against the
launch, is the question?

Dr. Lucas : I
knew that I was told on the morning of the launch that the initial
position of some members of Thiokol-and I don't know who it was-had
recommended that one not launch with the temperature less than 53
degrees Fahrenheit.

Chairman Rogers : And that didn't cause you enough concern so you
passed that information on to either Mr. Moore or Mr. Aldrich?

Dr. Lucas :
No, sir, because I was shown a document signed by Mr. Kilminster that
indicated that that would not be significant, that the temperature
would not be-that it would be that much lower, as I recall it.

It is clear that crucial information about the
O-ring damage in prior flights and about the Thiokol engineers'
argument with the NASA telecon participants never reached Jesse Moore
or Arnold Aldrich, the Levels I and II program officials, or J.A.
(Gene) Thomas, the Launch Director for 51-L. The testimony of Aldrich
describes this failure of the communication system very
aptly: 23

Dr. Feynman : . . . have you collected your thoughts yet on what
you think is the cause-I wouldn't call it of the accident but the
lack of communication which we have seen and which everybody is
worried about from one level to another? . . .

Mr. Aldrich :
Well, there were two specific breakdowns at least, in my impression,
[ 102 ]
about that situation. One is the situation that occurred the night
before the launch and leading up to the launch where there was a
significant review that has been characterized in a number of ways
before the Commission and the Commission's Subpanels and the fact
that that was not passed forward.

And I can only conclude what has been
reported, and that is that the people responsible for that work in
the Solid Rocket Booster project at Marshall believed that the
concern was not of a significance that would be required to be
brought forward because clearly the program requirements specify that
critical problems should be brought forward to Level II and not only
to Level II but through myself to Level I.

The second breakdown in communications,
however, and one that I personally am concerned about is the
situation of the variety of reviews that were conducted last summer
between the NASA Headquarters Organization and the Marshall
Organization on the same technical area and the fact that that was
not brought through my office in either direction-that is, it was not
worked through-by the NASA Headquarters Organization nor when the
Marshall Organization brought these concerns to be reported were we
involved.

And I believe that is a critical breakdown in
process and I think it is also against the documented reporting
channels that the program is supposed to operate to.

Now, it in fact did occur in that matter. In
fact, there is a third area of concern to me in the way the program
has operated. There is yet one other way that could have come to me,
given a different program structure. I'm sure you've had it reported
to you as it has been reported to me that in August or I think or at
least at some time late in the summer or early fall the Marshall SRB
project went forward to procure some additional Solid Rocket Motor
casings to be machined and new configurations for testing of the
joints.

Now it turns out that the budget for that kind
of work does not come through my Level II office. It is worked
directly between the Marshall Center in NASA Headquarters and there
again had I been responsible for....

Shuttle Program Management
Structure .

[ 103 ] ....the budget for
that sort of work, it would have to come through me, and it would
have been clear that something was going on here that I ought to know
about.

And so there are three areas of' breakdown,
and I haven't exactly answered your question. But I have explained it
in the way that I best know it and-well, I can say a fourth
thing.

There was some discussion earlier about the
amount of material that was or was not reported on O-ring erosion in
the FRRs [Flight Readiness Reviews] and I researched the FRR back
reports and also the flight anomaly reports that were forwarded to my
center-to my office-by the SRB [Solid Rocket Booster] project and as
was in-dicated, there is a treatment of the Solid Rocket Motor O-ring
erosion, I believe, for the STS 41-C FRR, which quantifies it and
indicates some limited amount of concern.

The next time that is mentioned, I believe it
is the STS 51-E, FRR in January 1985 or early in February, and that
indicates, again, a reference to it but refers back to the 41-C as
the only technical data.

And then from there forward the comment on
O-ring erosion only is that there was another instance and it is not
of concern.

Clearly the amount of reporting in the FRR is
of concern to me, but in parallel with that, each of the flight
anomalies in the STS program are required to be logged and reviewed
by each of the projects and then submitted through the Level II
system for formal close-out.

And in looking back and reviewing the anomaly
close-outs that were submitted to Level II from the SRB project, you
find that O-ring erosion was not considered to be an anomaly and,
therefore, it was not logged and, therefore, there are not anomaly
reports that progress from one flight to the other.

Yet, that is another way that that information
could have flagged the system, and the system is set up to use that
technique for flagging.

But if the erosion is classified as not an
anomaly, it then is in some other category and the system did not
force it in that direction. None of those are very focused answers,
but they were all factors.

The Commission Chairman, Mr. Rogers, asked
four key officials about their knowledge of the Thiokol objections to
launch: 24

Chairman Rogers : . . . By way of a question, could I ask, did any of
your gentlemen prior to launch know about the objections of Thiokol
to the launch?

Mr. Smith
[Kennedy Space Center Director]: I did not.

Mr. Thomas
[Launch Director]: No, sir. Mr. Aldrich [Shuttle Program Director]: I
did not.

Mr. Moore
[Associate Administrator for Space Flight]: I did not.

Additionally, in further testimony J.A. (Gene)
Thomas commented on the launch. 25

Mr. Hotz : . . . Mr. Thomas, you are familiar with the testimony
that this Commission has taken in the last several days on the
relationship of temperature to the seals in the Solid Rocket
Booster?

Mr. Thomas :
Yes, sir, I have been here all week.

Mr. Hotz : Is
this the type of information that you feel that you should have as
Launch Director to make a launch decision?

Mr. Thomas :
If you refer to the fact that the temperature according to the Launch
Commit Criteria should have been 53 degrees, as has been testified,
rather than 31, yes, I expect that to be in the LCC. That is a
controlling document that we use in most cases to make a decision for
launch.

Mr. Hotz :
But you are not really very happy about not having had this
information before the launch?

Mr. Thomas :
No, sir. I can assure you that if we had had that information, we
wouldn't have launched if it hadn't been 53 degrees.

[ 104 ] Findings

l. The Commission concluded that there was a
serious flaw in the decision making process leading up to the launch
of flight 51-L. A well structured and managed system emphasizing
safety would have flagged the rising doubts about the Solid Rocket
Booster joint seal. Had these matters been clearly stated and
emphasized in the flight readiness process in terms reflecting the
views of most of the Thiokol engineers and at least some of the
Marshall engineers, it seems likely that the launch of 51-L might not
have occurred when it did.

2. The waiving of launch constraints appears
to have been at the expense of flight safety. There was no system
which made it imperative that launch constraints and waivers of
launch constraints be considered by all levels of management.

3. The Commission is troubled by what appears
to be a propensity of management at Marshall to contain potentially
serious problems and to attempt to resolve them internally rather
than communicate them forward. This tendency is altogether at odds
with the need for Marshall to function as part of a system working
toward successful flight missions, interfacing and communicating with
the other parts of the system that work to the same end.

4. The Commission concluded that the Thiokol
Management reversed its position and recommended the launch of 51-L,
at the urging of Marshall and contrary to the views of its engineers
in order to accommodate a major customer.

Chronology of Events Related to
Temperature Concerns Prior to Launch of Challenger (STS
51-L)

.

Time

Key Participants

Event

.

12:36 PM (EST)

January 27, 1986

NASA Project Managers and
Contractor Support Personnel (including Morton
Thiokol).

Launch Scrub . Decision is made to scrub due to high
crosswinds at launch site.

.

Approximately

l :00 PM ( EST)

Same as above.

Post-Scrub
Discussion . All
appropriate personnel are polled as to feasibility to
launch again with 24-hour cycle and it results in no SRB
constraints for launch at 9:38 AM, 28 January
1986.

Request is made for all
participants to report any constraints.

.

Approximately

1:00 PM (EST)

Kennedy Space Center

(1) Boyd C. Brinton, Manager,
Space Booster Project, MTI;

(2) Lawrence O. Wear, Manager,
SRM Project Office, Marshall.

Conversation . Wear asks Brinton if Thiokol had any
concerns about predicted low temperatures and about what
Thiokol had said about cold temperature effects following
January 1985 flight 51-C.

Morton Thiokol, Utah

(1) Arnold R. Thompson,
Supervisor, Rocket Motor Cases;

(2) Robert Ebeling, Manager,
Ignition System and Final Assembly SRM Project.

Brinton telephones Thompson and
other MTI personnel to ask them to determine if there
were concerns based on predicted weather conditions.
Ebeling and other engineers are notified and asked for
evaluation.

.

[ 105 ]
Approximately

2:00 PM (EST)

NASA Levels I and II Management
With Appropriate Program Managers and Contract
Personnel

(1) Jesse W. Moore, Associate
Administrator, Space Flight, NASA HQ and Director,
JSC;

(2) Arnold D. Aldrich, Manager,
Space Transportation Systems Program, JSC;

(3) Lawrence B. Mulloy, Manager,
SRB Project, Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)

(4) Dr. William Lucas, Director,
MSFC.

Mission Management Team
Meeting . Discussion is
centered around the temperature at the launch facility
and weather conditions predicted for launch at 9:38 AM on
28 January 1986.

.

Approximately

2:30 PM (EST)

At Thiokol, Utah

(1) R. Boisjoly, Seal Task Force,
Morton Thiokol, Utah;

(2) Robert Ebeling, Manager,
Ignition System and Final Assembly, SRM Project.

Boisjoly learns of cold
temperatures at Cape at meeting convened by
Ebeling

.

Approximately

4:00 PM (EST)

At Kennedy Space Center

(1) Allan J. McDonald, Director,
SRM Project, Morton Thiokol;

(2) Carver Kennedy, Director of'
Vehicle Assembly Building Operations, and Vice President
of Space Operations at KSC, for Morton Thiokol. At
Thiokol, Utah Robert Ebeling, Department Manager,
Ignition System and Final Assembly, SRM Project.

Telephone
Conversation . McDonald
receives call at Carver Kennedy's residence from Ebeling
expressing concern about performance of SRB field joints
at low temperatures.

McDonald indicates he will call
back latest temperature predictions up to launch
time.

Carver Kennedy calls Launch
Operations Center and received latest temperature
information.

McDonald transmits data to Utah
and indicates will set up telecon and asks engineering to
prepare.

.

Approximately

5:15 PM (EST)

At Kennedy Space Center

(1) Allan J. McDonald, Director,
SRM Project, Morton Thiokol, Inc.;

(2) Cecil Houston, MSFC Resident
Manager, at KSC.

Telephone
Conversation . McDonald
calls Cecil Houston informing him that Morton Thiokol
engineering had concerns regarding O-ring
temperatures.

Cecil Houston indicates he will
set up teleconference with Marshall Space Flight Center
and Morton Thiokol.

.

[ 106 ]
Approximately

5:25 PM (EST)

At Kennedy Space Center

Cecil Houston, MSFC Resident Manager,
at KSC.

At Marshall Space Flight
Center

Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy Manager,
Shuttle Projects Office, MSFC.

Telephone
Conversation . Cecil
Houston calls Lovingood, informing him of the concerns of
temperature on the O-rings and asks him to establish a
telecon with:

(1) Stanley R. Reinartz,
Manager, Shuttle Projects Office, MSFC (at Kennedy);

(2) Lawrence B. Mulloy,
Manager, SRB Project, MSFC (at Kennedy);

(3) George Hardy, Deputy
Director, Science and Engineering (at Marshall);

(4) Thiokol Wasatch Division
personnel.

.

Approximately

5:30 PM (EST)

At Kennedy Space Center

Stanley R. Reinartz, Manager, Shuttle
Projects Office, MSFC

At Marshall Space Flight Center

Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy Manager,
Shuttle Projects Office, MSFC.

Telephone
Conversation . Lovingood
calls Reinartz to inform him of planned 5:45 PM (EST)
teleconference.

Lovingood proposes that Kingsbury
(Director of Science and Engineering MSFC), participate
in teleconference.

.

Approximately

5:45 PM (EST)

At Kennedy Space
Center

Stanley R. Reinartz, Manager, Shuttle
Projects Office (MSFC).

At Marshall Space Flight Center

Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy Manager,
Shuttle Projects Office, MSFC.

Plus other personnel at Kennedy,
Marshall, and Thiokol, Utah.

First
Teleconference . Concerns
regarding temperature effects on the O-rings are
discussed.

MTI is of the opinion launch
should be delayed until Noon or afternoon.

It is decided that another
telecon at 8:15 PM will be set up to transmit the data to
all of the parties and to have more personnel
involved.

Lovingood recommends to Reinartz
to include Lucas, Director, MSFC and Kingsbury in 8:45 PM
conference and to plan to go to Level II if MTI
recommends not launching.

.

Approximately

6:30 PM (EST)

At Marshall Space Flight Center

Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy Manager,
Shuttle Projects Office MSFC.

At Kennedy Space Center

Stanley R. Reinartz, Manager, Shuttle
Projects Office, MSFC.

Telephone
Conversation . Lovingood
calls Reinartz and tells him that if Thiokol persists,
they should not launch.

Lovingood also suggests advising
Aldrich, Manager, National Transportation System (Level
II), of teleconference to prepare him for Level I meeting
to inform of possible recommendation to delay.

.

[ 107 ]
Approximately

7:00 PM (EST)

At Kennedy Space Center

(1) Lawrence B. Mulloy, Manager,
SRB Project, MSFC.

(2) Stanley R. Reinartz, Manager,
Shuttle Projects Office, MSFC;

(3) Dr. William Lucas, Director,
MSFC;

(4) Jim Kingsbury, Director of
Science and Engineering, MSFC.

Conversation . Reinartz and Mulloy visit Lucas and
Kingsbury in their motel rooms to inform them of Thiokol
concern and planned teleconference.

.

Approximately

8:45 PM (EST)

At Morton Thiokol, Utah

(1) Jerald Mason, Senior Vice
President, Wasatch Operations;

(2) Calvin Wiggins, Vice
President and General Manager, Space Division,
Wasatch;

(3) Joe C. Kilminster, Vice
President, Space Booster Programs, Wasatch;

(4) Robert K. Lund, Vice
President, Engineering;

(5) Roger Boisjoly, Member Seal
Task Force;

(6) Arnold R. Thompson,
Supervisor, Rocket Motor Cases.

At Kennedy Space Center

(1) Stanley R. Reinartz, Manager,
Shuttle Projects Office, MSFC;

(2) Lawrence B. Mulloy, Manager,
SRB Project, MSFC;

(3) Allan J. McDonald, Director,
SRM Project, MTI.

At Marshall Space Flight Center

(1) George B. Hardy, Deputy
Director, Science and Engineering;

(2) Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy
Manager, Shuttle Project Office;

(3) Ben Powers, Engineering
Structures and Propulsion. Plus other personnel (see
table page 111).

Second
Teleconference . Charts
present a history of the O-ring erosion and blow-by for
the primary seal in the field joints, including results
of subscale tests, previous flights and static tests of
Solid Rocket Motors.

The data shows that the timing
function of the O-rings will be slower due to lower
temperatures and that the worst blow-by occurred on SRM
15 (STS 51-C) in January 1985 with O-ring temperatures of
53 degrees Fahrenheit.

Recommendation by Thiokol (Lund)
is not to fly STS 51-L (SAM-25) until the temperature of
the O-ring reached 53 degrees Fahrenheit, which was the
lowest temperature of any previous flight.

Mulloy asks for recommendation
from Kilminster.

Kilminster states that based upon
the engineering recommendation, he can not recommend
launch.

Hardy is reported by both
McDonald and Boisjoly to have said he is "appalled" by
Thiokol's recommendation.

Reinartz comments that he is
under the impression that SRM is qualified from 40
degrees Fahrenheit to 90 degrees Fahrenheit. ~ NASA
personnel challenge conclusions and
recommendations.

Kilminster asks for five minutes
off

[ 108 ]
Time

Key Participants

Event

.

Approximately

10:30 PM (EST)

Thiokol Personnel

(1) Jerald Mason, Senior Vice
President, Wasatch Operations;

(2) Joe C. Kilminster, Vice
President, Space Booster Program;

(3) Calvin Wiggins, Vice
President and General Manager, Space Division;

(4) Robert K. Lund, Vice
President, Engineering;

(5) Arnold R. Thompson,
Supervisor, Rocket Motor Cases;

(6) Roger Boisjoly, Member, Seal
Task Force;

(7) Brian Russell, Special
Projects SRM Program Office;

(8) Robert Ebeling, Manager,
Ignition System and Final Assembly, SRM Project.

Plus other personnel

Thiokol Caucus . Caucus continues for about 30 minutes at
Thiokol, Wasatch, Utah.

Major issues are (1) temperature
effects on O-ring, and (2) erosion of the O-ring.

Thompson and Boisjoly voice
objections to launch and indication is that Lund also is
reluctant to launch.

A final management review is
conducted with only Mason, Lund, Kilminster, and
Wiggins.

Lund is asked to put on
management hat by Mason.

Final agreement is: (1) there is
a substantial margin to erode the primary O-ring by a
factor of three times the previous worst case, and (2)
even if the primary O-ring does not seal, the secondary
is in position and will.

.

Approximately

10:30 PM to 11:00 PM (EST)

At Kennedy Space Center

(1) Allan J. McDonald, Manager,
Space Booster Project, Morton Thiokol, Inc. (MTI);

(2) Lawrence B. Mulloy, Manager,
SRB Projects, MSFC;

(3) Stanley R. Reinartz, Manager,
Shuttle Projects, MSFC;

(4) Jack Buchanan, Manager, KSC
Operations, for MTI;

(5) Cecil Houston, MSFC Resident
manager, at KSC.

Conversation at
Kennedy . McDonald
continues to argue for delay.

McDonald challenges Reinartz's
rationale that SRM is qualified at 40 degrees F. to 90
degrees F., and Mulloy's explanation that Propellant Mean
Bulk Temperatures are within specifications.

.

Approximately

11:00 PM (EST)

Same participants at 8:45 PM
Teleconference.

Second Teleconference
(Cont'd) . Thiokol
indicates it had reassessed; temperature effects are
concern, but data is inconclusive.

Kilminster reads the rationale
for recommending launch.

Thiokol recommends launch.

Hardy requests that Thiokol put:
writing their recommendation and send it by fax to both
Kennedy and Marshall.

.

[ 109 ]
Approximately

11:15 to 11:30 PM (EST)

At Kennedy Space Center

(1) Allan J . McDonald, Manager,
Space Booster Project, MTI;

(2) Lawrence Mulloy, Manager, SRB
Projects Office, MSFC;

(3) Stanley R. Reinartz, Manager,
Shuttle Projects Office, MSFC;

(4) Jack Buchanan, Manager, KSC
Operations, for MTI;

(5) Cecil Houston, Manager, MSFC
Resident Office at KSC.

Conversation at
Kennedy . McDonald argues
again for delay asking how NASA could rationalize
launching below qualification temperature.

McDonald indicates if anything
happened, he would not want to have to explain to Board
of Inquiry.

McDonald indicates he would
cancel launch since (1) O-ring problem at low
temperatures; (2) booster recovery ships heading into
wind toward shore due to high seas, and (3) icing
conditions on launch pad.

McDonald is told it is not his
concern and that his above concerns will be passed on in
advisory capacity.

.

Approximately

11:45 PM (EST)

Telefax . Kilminster faxes Thiokol's recommendation
to launch at 9:45 M EST, 27 January 1986 ( 11 :45
EST

Fax is signed by
Kilminster.

McDonald retrieves fax at
KSC.

.

Approximately

11:30 PM to 12:00 AM (EST)

At Kennedy Space Center

(1) Lawrence B. Mulloy, Manager,
SRB Projects Office, MSFC;

(2) Stanley R. Reinartz, Manager,
Shuttle Projects, MSFC;

(3) Arnold D. Aldrich, Manager,
National Space Transportation System Program Office,
JSC.

Teleconference . Discussion centers around the recovery
ships' activities and brief discussion of the ice issue
on the launch complex area.

Reinartz and Mulloy place call to
Aldrich.

McDonald delivers fax to Jack
Buchanan's office at Kennedy Space Center and overhears
part of conversation.

Aldrich is apparently not
informed of the O-ring concerns.

.

Approximately

12:01 AM (EST)

January 28

Kennedy Space Center meeting
breaks up.

.

Approximately

1:30 to 3:00 AM (EST)

At Kennedy Space Center

(1) Charles Stevenson, Supervisor
of Ice Crew; KSC

(2) B.K. Davis, Ice Team Member,
MSFC

Ice Crew Inspection of Launch
Pad B .

Ice crew finds large quantity of
ice on Fixed Service Structure, mobile launch platform,
and pad apron; and reports conditions.

.

Approximately

5:00 AM (EST)

At Kennedy Space Center

(1) Lawrence B. Mulloy, Manager,
SRB Project, MSFC;

(2) Dr. William Lucas, Director,
(MSFC);

(3) Jim Kingsbury, Director of
Science and Engineering, MSFC.

Conversation . Mulloy tells Lucas of Thiokol's concerns
over temperature effects on O-rings and final
resolution.

Lucas is shown copy of Thiokol
telefax.

.

[ 110 ]
Approximately

7:00-9:00 AM (EST)

At Kennedy Space Center

(1) Charles Stevenson, Supervisor
of Ice Crew, KSC;

(2) B. K. Davis, Ice Team Member
MSFC .

Ice Crew Inspection of Launch
Pad B . Ice crew inspects
Launch Pad B and Challenger for ice formation.

Davis measures temperatures on
SRBs, External Tank, Orbiter, and launch pad with
infrared pyrometer.

Left-hand SRB appears to be about
25 degrees F. and right-hand SRB appears to be about 8
degrees F. near the aft region.

Ice crew is not concerned since
there is no Launch Commit Criteria on surface
temperatures and does not report.

Crew reports patches of sheet ice
on lower segment and skirt of left Solid Rocket
Booster.

.

Approximately

8:00 AM (EST)

At Marshall Space Flight Center

(1) Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy
Manager, Shuttle Projects Office, MSFC;

(2) Jack Lee, Deputy Director
MSFC.

Conversation . Lovingood informs Lee of previous night's
discussions.

He indicates that Thiokol had at
first recommended not launching, and then after Wasatch
conference recommended launching.

He also informs Lee that Thiokol
is providing in writing their recommendation for
launch.

.

Approximately

9:00 AM (EST)

NASA Levels I and Level II
Management With Appropriate Project Managers and Contract
Personnel.

Mission Management Team
Meeting . Ice conditions at
launch complex are discussed. There is no apparent
discussion of temperature effects on O-ring seal.

.

Approximately

10:30 AM (EST)

At Kennedy Space Center

(1) Charles Stevenson, Supervisor
of Ice Crew;

(2) B.K. Davis, Ice Team
Member

Ice Crew Inspection of Launch
Pad B . Ice crew inspects
Launch Pad B for third time.

Crew removes ice from water
troughs, returns to Launch Control Center at T-20
minutes, reports conditions to Mission Management Team
including fact that ice is still on left Solid Rocket
Booster.

.

11:38 AM (EST)

Launch . Challenger (STS 51-L) is launched.

[ 111 ] Final Teleconference Participants

NASA Marshall Space Flight
Center

.

Morton Thiokol Wasatch
Division

.

.

1. George B. Hardy, Deputy Director,
Science and Engineering, MSFC

1. Jerald Mason, Senior Vice
President, Wasatch Operations, MTI

2. Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy
Manager, Shuttle Projects Office, MSFC

2. Calvin Wiggins, Vice President and
General Manager, Space Division, MTI

3. Leslie F. Adams, Deputy Manager,
SRB Project, MSFC

3. Joe C. Kilminster, Vice President,
Space Booster Programs, MTI

4. Lawrence O. Wear, Manager, SRM
Project Office, MSFC

4. Robert K. Lund, Vice President,
Engineering, MTI

5. John Q. Miller, Technical
Assistant, SRM Project, MSFC

5. Larry H. Sayer, Director,
Engineering and Design, MTI

6. J. Wayne Littles, Associate
Director for Engineering, MSFC

6. William Macbeth, Manager, Case
Projects, Space Booster Project Engineering, Wasatch
Division, MTI

7. Robert J. Schwinghamer, Director,
Material and Processes Laboratory, MSFC

7. Donald M. Ketner, Supervisor, Gas
Dynamics Section and Head Seal Task Force, MTI

8. Wilbur A. Riehl, Chief,
Nonmetallic Materials Division, MSFC

8. Roger Boisjoly, Member, Seal Task
Force, MTI

9. John P. McCarty, Deputy Director,
Structures and Propulsion Laboratory, MSFC

9. Arnold R. Thompson, Supervisor,
Rocket Motor Cases, MTI

10. Ben Powers, Engineering
Structures and Propulsion Laboratory, MSFC

10. Jack R. Kapp, Manager, Applied
Mechanics Department, MTI

11. James Smith, Chief Engineer, SRB
Program, MSFC

11. Jerry Burn, Associate Engineer,
Applied Mechanics, MTI

12. Keith E. Coates, Chief Engineer,
Special Projects Office, MSFC

12. Joel Maw, Associate Scientist,
Heat Transfer Section, MTI

13. John Schell, Retired Engineer,
Materials Laboratory, MSFC

13. Brian Russell, Manager, Special
Projects, SRM Project, MTI

Present at KSC

14. Robert Ebeling, Manager, Ignition
System and Final Assembly, SRB Project, MTI

14. Cecil Houston, MSFC Resident
Manager, at KSC

Present at MSFC

15. Stanley R. Reinartz, Manager,
Shuttle Projects Office, MSFC

15. Boyd C. Brinton, Manager, Space
Booster Project, MTI

16. Lawrence B. Mulloy, Manager, SRB
Project, MSFC

16. Kyle Speas, Ballistics Engineer,
MTI

Present at KSC

17. Allan J. McDonald, Director, SRM
Project, MTI

18. Jack Buchanan, Manager, KSC
Operations, MTI

[ 112 ]

Above, Shuttle 51-L on Kennedy Space
Center Pad 39B in the early morning of launch day. Temperatures were
well below freezing, as indicated by the lower left photo, which
shows thick ice in a water trough despite the use of an anti-freeze
solution.

[ 113 ]

Above [upper left], foot long icicles
on a lower level of the Fixed Service Structure frame the attachment
point where the Orbiter is attached to the external tank (arrow).
Icing was even more extensive at upper levels of the service
structure [(upper right, lower left)]. At right below is a ground
communications box (not used during launch) rendered inoperable by
heavy ice.

[ 114 ] Ambiguities In The Decision Making Process

During the night and early morning of January
28, another problem was developing due to the extreme cold weather,
predicted to be in the low 20s for approximately 11 hours. Reaction
control system heaters on the Orbiter were activated and the Solid
Rocket Booster recovery batteries were checked and found to be
functioning within specifications. There were no serious concerns
regarding the External Tank. The freeze protection plan for the
launch pad was implemented, but the results were not what had been
anticipated. The freeze protection plan usually involves completely
draining the water system. However, this was not possible because of
the imminent launch of 51-L. In order to prevent pipes from freezing,
a decision was made to allow water to run slowly from the system.
This had never been done before, and the combination of freezing
temperatures and stiff winds caused large amounts of ice to form
below the 240-foot level of the fixed service structure including the
access to the crew emergency egress slide wire baskets. Ice also was
forming in the water trays beneath the vehicle.

These conditions were first identified by the
Ice Team at approximately 2:00 a.m. on January 28 and were assessed
by management and engineering throughout the night, culminating with
a Mission Management Team meeting at 9:00 a.m. At this meeting,
representatives for the Orbiter prime contractor, Rockwell
International, expressed their concern about what effects the ice
might have on the Orbiter during launch. Rockwell had been alerted
about the icing conditions during the early morning and was working
on the problem at its Downey, California, facility.

During Commission hearings, the president of
Rockwell's Space Transportation Systems Division, Dr. Rocco Petrone,
and two of his vice presidents, Robert Glaysher and Martin
Cioffoletti, all described the work done regarding the ice conditions
and the Rockwell position at the 9:00 a.m. meeting with regard to
launch. Dr. Petrone had arrived at Kennedy on Friday, January 24. On
Monday the 27th he left to return to Rockwell's facility in
California, but Glaysher and Cioffoletti remained at Kennedy. Dr.
Petrone testified that he first heard about the ice at 4:00 a.m.
Pacific Standard Time. He explained what followed:
26

"I had gotten up and went to the
support room to support this launch. We have people monitoring
consoles, and I checked in, and they told me there was a concern, and
when I arrived at about 4:30, 4:40 (PST), I was informed we were
working the problem with our aerodynamicist and debris people, but
very importantly, we would have to make an input to Kennedy for a
meeting scheduled at 6:00 o'clock our time and 9:00 o'clock Florida
time.

"We had approximately an hour of work to bring
together. The work had been underway when I arrived and was
continuing.

"At that time I got on the phone with my
Orbiter program managers just to discuss background of where we were,
how things stood, and what their concerns were locally. They
described what they knew in Florida, and we also in Downey did
television input, and we could see some of the ice scenes that were
shown here this morning.

"We arrived through a series of meetings to a
top level discussion at approximately 5:30 Pacific Standard Time,
from which we drew the following conclusions: Ice on the mobile
launcher itself, it could be debris. We were very concerned with
debris of any kind at the time of launch. With this particular ice,
one, could it hit the Orbiter? There was wind blowing from the west.
That appeared not to be so, that it wouldn't hit the Orbiter but
would land on the mobile launcher. The second concern was what
happens to that ice at the time you light your liquid fuel engines,
the SSMEs, and would it throw it around and ricochet and potentially
hit the Orbiter.

"The third aspect is the one that has been
discussed here of aspiration, what would happen when the large SRM
[Solid Rocket Motors] motors ignite and in effect suck in air,
referred to as aspiration, and ice additionally would come down, how
much unknown.

"The prime thing we were concerned about was
the unknown base line. We had not launched in conditions of that
nature, and we just felt we had an unknown.

"I then called my program managers over in
Florida at 5:45 (PST) and said we could [ 115 ] not recommend
launching from here, from what we see. We think the tiles would be
endangered, and we had a very short conversation. We had a meeting to
go through, and I said let's make sure that NASA understands that
Rockwell feels it is not safe to launch, and that was the end of my
conversation . "

Mr. Glaysher, who was at Kennedy, came to the
center at approximately 7:45 a.m. EST. He conferred with Rockwell's
Chief Engineer as well as the Vice President of Engineering, Dr. John
Peller, at Rockwell's Downey plant. At 9:00 a.m., after the ice
debris team had reported back from the pad inspection, Glaysher was
asked for Rockwell's position on launch. He discussed aspiration
effects, the possible ricochet of ice from the fixed service
structure, and what the ice resting on the mobile launch platform
would do at ignition. Glaysher said he told the Mission Management
Team when it met at 9:00 a.m. that the ice was an unknown condition,
and Rockwell was unable to predict where the ice would go or the
degree of potential damage to the Orbiter thermal protection system
if it were struck by the ice. He testified that his recommendation to
NASA was: 27

"[M]y exact quote-and it comes in
two parts. The first one was, Rockwell could not 100 percent assure
that it is safe to fly which I quickly changed to Rockwell cannot
assure that it is safe to fly .

Rockwell's other vice president at Kennedy,
Martin Cioffoletti, described the concern about ice in a slightly
different manner: 28

Mr. Cioffoletti : Similarly, I was called in and told about the problem
and came into the 6:00 o'clock meeting which you heard about a few
minutes ago, and at the conclusion of that meeting I spoke with Mr.
Dick Kohrs, the deputy program manager from Johnson Space Flight
Center, and he asked if we could get the Downey folks to look at the
falling ice and how it might reverse toward the vehicle, and also,
did we have any information on aspiration effects.

So I did call back to Downey and got the John
Peller folks working on that problem, and they did, as you saw from
Charlie Stevenson's sketches, predict that the ice would travel only
about halfway to the vehicle, freefalling ice carried by the winds.
So we felt that ice was not a problem. However, it would land on the
mobile launch platform. That we considered a problem. We also
investigated the aspiration data base we had, and we had seen the
aspiration effect on previous launches where things were pulled into
the SRB [Solid Rocket Booster] hole after ignition, but we had never
seen anything out as far as the fixed surface tower. So we felt in
fact it was an unknown. We did not have the data base to operate from
an aspiration effect.

At the 9:00 o'clock meeting, I was asked by
Arnie Aldrich, the program manager, to give him the results of our
analysis, and I essentially told him what I just told you and felt
that we did not have a sufficient data base to absolutely assure that
nothing would strike the vehicle, and so we could not lend our 100
percent credence, if you will, to the fact that it was safe to fly
.

I said I could not predict the trajectory that
the ice on the mobile launch platform would take at SRB
ignition.

Chairman Rogers : But I think NASA's position probably would be that
they thought that you were satisfied with the launch. Did you convey
to them in a way that they were able to understand that you were not
approving the launch from your standpoint?

Mr. Cioffoletti : I felt that by telling them we did not have a
sufficient data base and could not analyze the trajectory of the ice,
I felt he understood that Rockwell was not giving a positive
indication that we were for the launch.

After Cioffoletti's testimony at the
Commission hearings, Dr. Petrone was pressed for a more detailed
description of Rockwell's launch recommendation: 29

General Kutyna : Dr. Petrone, you've got a lot more experience than I
have in this business, but the few launch conferences that I have
been on the question is very simple. Are you go or are you no-go for
launch, and `` maybe" isn't an answer. I hear all kinds of
qualifications and cautions and considerations here.

Did someone ask you are you go or nogo? Was
that not asked?

[ 116 ] Dr. Petrone : At this
particular meeting, as far as-and I was not in Florida, and so I
cannot answer that. It had been done at earlier meetings. This was a
technical evaluation of a series of problems, and we talked about
debris hitting the TPS [thermal protection system] and the tiles, and
the long series of reviews that we had done that morning and all led
us to a conclusion that they were not safe to fly.

And we transmitted that to program managers
along with the technical evaluation quickly of why we had arrived at
that.

So much of it is how the question gets raised
because earlier we had aspiration work, ricochet work, a number of
things which we did, and then we came up with our
recommendation.

Chairman Rogers : And your recommendation now you say it was, it was
unsafe to fly?

Dr. Petrone :
Correct, sir.

Two things are apparent from the Rockwell
testimony. First, Rockwell did not feel it had sufficient time to
research and resolve the ice on the pad problem. Second, even though
there was considerable discussion about ice, Rockwell's position on
launch described above was not clearly communicated to NASA officials
in the launch decision chain during the hours preceding 51-L's
launch.

At a meeting with Commission investigators on
March 4, 1986, at Kennedy, Horace Lamberth, NASA director of Shuttle
Engineering, said he did not interpret Rockwell's position at the
9:00 a.m. Mission Management Team meeting on January 28 as being
"no-go." Lamberth said the the language used by Rockwell was "we
can't give you 100 percent assurance" but there was no feeling in his
mind that Rockwell was voicing a no-go recommendation. "It just
didn't come across as the normal Rockwell nogo safety of flight
issues come across." 30 This conclusion is confirmed in part by an interview
of Dr. John Peller, Rockwell's Vice President of Engineering, who was
assigned the ice problem early Tuesday morning. Dr. Peller, in
describing a telephone conversation with the Johnson Director of
Engineering, Tom Moser, stated: 31

Dr. Peller : That was a call from Tom Moser to me, in which he
asked again to understand my concerns. And I just repeated the same
concerns. And he asked, "Did I think that it was likely that the
vehicle would take safety critical damage?"

And I said, "From the possibility that the
vehicle would take safety critical damage," I said, "there's a
probability in a sense that it was probably an unlikely event, but I
could not prove that it wouldn't happen . . ."

. . . I never used the words "no-go" for
launch. I did use the words that we cannot prove it is safe. And
normally that's what we were asked to do. We were unable to do that
in this particular case, although it was a strange case, that we
normally don't get involved in.

Arnold Aldrich, NASA Mission Management Team
Leader, described NASA's view of the ice situation and his
recollection of Rockwell's position. He said that on Tuesday morning
the mission management team did a detailed analysis of the ice on the
fixed service structure. Representatives from the ice team, Rockwell,
and the directors of Engineering (Horace Lamberth) and the Orbiter
project (Richard Colonna) all considered the problem. Aldrich
reported this discussion as follows : 32

"Following the discussion of the
acceptability of the ice threat to the Orbiter, based upon the
conditions described in detail of the fixed service structure-and
some of that you've seen here portrayed well this morning-I asked the
NASA managers involved for their position on what they felt about the
threat of that to the Orbiter.

"Mr. Lamberth reported that KSC [Kennedy Space
Center] engineering had calculated the trajectories, as you've heard,
of the falling ice from the fixed service structure east side, with
current 10-knot winds at 300 degrees, and predicted that none of this
ice would contact the Orbiter during its ignition or launch sequence;
and that their calculations even showed that if the winds would
increase to 15 knots, we still would not have contact with the
Orbiter.

"Mr. Colonna, Orbiter project manager,
reported that similar calculations had been performed in Houston by
the mission evaluation team there. They concurred in this assessment.
And further, Mr. Colonna stated that, even if these calculations were
[ 117 ]
significantly in error, that it was their belief that falling ice
from the fixed service structure, if it were in fact to make its way
to the Orbiter, it would only be the most lightweight ice that was in
that falling stream, and it would impact the Orbiter at a very
oblique angle.

"Impacts of this type would have very low
probability of causing any serious damage to the Orbiter, and at most
would result in post-flight turnaround repairs.

"At this point I placed a phone call to Mr.
Moser that I had previously mentioned, director of Engineering at the
Johnson Space Center, who was in the mission evaluation room, and he
confirmed the detailed agreement with Mr. Lamberth's and Mr.
Colonna's position....

"And both Mr. Lamberth and Mr. Colonna
reported that their assessment was that the time it took for the ice
to fall, to hit the Orbiter and to rebound, and the location of the
fixed service structure on the MLP [mobile launch platform] would not
cause that ice in their view to be a concern to rebound and come up
and impact the rear end of the Orbiter.

"Following these discussions, I asked for a
position regarding proceeding with the launch. Mr. Colonna, Mr.
Lamberth, and Mr. Moser all recommended that we proceed.

"At that time, I also polled Mr. Robert
Glaysher, the vice president, Orbiter project manager, Rockwell
International STS Division, and Mr. Marty Cioffoletti, Shuttle
Integration Project Manager, Rockwell International STS Division. Mr.
Glaysher stated-and he had been listening to this entire discussion
and had not been directly involved with it, but had been party to
this the whole time.

"His statement to me as best I can reconstruct
it to report to you at this time was that, while he did not disagree
with the analysis that JSC (Johnson Space Center) and KSC had
reported, that they would not give an unqualified go for launch as
ice on the launch complex was a condition which had not previously
been experienced, and thus this posed a small additional, but
unquantifiable, risk. Mr. Glaysher did not ask or insist that we not
launch, however.

"At the conclusion of the above review, I felt
reasonably confident that the launch should proceed."

In addition to Rockwell's input, Mr. Aldrich
also had reports from other contractors and the ice, frost and debris
team at the 9:00 session. Ice on the vehicle assembly appeared to be
of no concern; sheet ice in the noise suppression trays had been
broken up and removed; as previously noted the ice team reported that
there was ice on the fixed service structure between 95 feet above
ground and 215 feet; no ice above 255 feet. The north and west sides
had large amounts of ice and icicles. The final assessment was made
that the ice on the fixed service structure would not strike or
damage the Orbiter tiles or the vehicle assembly during ignition or
ascent, owing to the considerable horizontal distance between the
service structure and the vehicle assembly. The decision was made to
launch pending a final ice team review of the launch complex in order
to assess any changes in the situation. This inspection was completed
following the Mission Management Team meeting and the ice team report
indicated no significant change.

Findings

The Commission is concerned about three
aspects of the ice-on-the-pad issue.

1. An analysis of all of the testimony and
interviews establishes that Rockwell's recommendation on launch was
ambiguous. The Commission finds it difficult, as did Mr. Aldrich, to
conclude that there was a no-launch recommendation. Moreover, all
parties were asked specifically to contact Aldrich or Moore about
launch objections due to weather. Rockwell made no phone calls or
further objections to Aldrich or other NASA officials after the 9:00
Mission Management Team meeting and subsequent to the resumption of
the countdown.

2. The Commission is also concerned about the
NASA response to the Rockwell position at the 9:00 a.m. meeting.
While it is understood that decisions have to be made in launching a
Shuttle, the Commission is not convinced Levels I and II
appropriately considered Rockwell's concern about the ice. However
ambiguous Rockwell's position was, it is clear that they did tell
NASA that the ice was an unknown condition. Given [ 118 ] the extent of the
ice on the pad (see photos pages 112 and 113), the admitted unknown
effect of the Solid Rocket Motor and Space Shuttle Main Engines
ignition on the ice, as well as the fact that debris striking the
Orbiter was a potential flight safety hazard, the Commission finds
the decision to launch questionable under those circumstances. In
this situation, NASA appeared to be requiring a contractor to prove
that it was not safe to launch, rather than proving it was safe.
Nevertheless, the Commission has determined that the ice was not a
cause of the 51-L accident and does not conclude that NASA's decision
to launch specifically overrode a no-launch recommendation by an
element contractor.

3. The Commission concluded that the freeze
protection plan for launch pad 39B was inadequate. The Commission
believes that the severe cold and presence of so much ice on the
fixed service structure made it inadvisable to launch on the morning
of January 28, and that margins of safety were whittled down too
far.

Additionally, access to the crew emergency
slide wire baskets was hazardous due to ice conditions. Had the crew
been required to evacuate the Orbiter on the launch pad, they would
have been running on an icy surface. The Commission believes the crew
should have been made aware of the situation, and based on the
seriousness of the condition, greater consideration should have been
given to delaying the launch.

[ 119 ] References

1. NASA Program
Directive Shuttle FRR, September 26, 1983, Appendix K, Volume
I.

2. Shuttle Projects
Flight Readiness Review Mission 51-L, January 9. 1986.

3. STS 51-L Flight
Readiness Review, Solid Rocket Booster, January 15, 1986.

4. STS 51-L Flight
Readiness Review.

5. Commission Hearing
Transcript, May 2, 1986, pages 2610-2611.

6. Commission Interview
Transcript, Ebeling, R., March 19, 1986, page 13.

7. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 25, 1986, pages 1264-1268.

8. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 26, 1986, pages 1694-1697 and 1681.

9. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 25, 1986, pages 1412-1417.

10. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 25, 1986, pages 1268-1271.

11. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 14, 1986, pages 1078- 1080.

12. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 25, 1986, pages 1346-1347.

13. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 25, 1986, pages 1418-1422.

14. Commission
Interview Transcript, April 1, pages 37-53.

15. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 25, 1986, pages 1456-1457.

16. Commission
Interview Transcript, Mason, J., April 2, 1986, pages
24-26.

17. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 14, 1986, pages 1234-1236.

18. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 26, 1986, pages 1537-1541.

19. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 26, 1986, 1553-1566 and 1560-1563.

20. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 26, 1986, pages 1598-1601.

21. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 26, 1986, pages 1588- 1589.

22. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 27, 1986, pages 1867-1868 and
1876-1879.

23. Commission Hearing
Transcript, April 3, 1986, pages 2538-2541.

24. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 27, 1986, page 1899.

25. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 27, 1986, pages 1932-1933.

26. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 27, 1986, pages 1798-1800.

27. Ibid, page
1802.

28. Ibid, pages 1803 -
1806.

29. Ibid, pages 1806
and 1807.

30. Commission Work
Session, Pre-Launch, March 4, 1986, page 75.

31. Commission
Interview Transcript, Peller, J., April 10, 1986, pages 13 -
14.

32. Commission Hearing
Transcript, February 27, 1986, pages 1833-1836.

