

v1ch9

Report of the PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION
on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident

Chapter IX: Other Safety
Considerations.

[ 178 ] In the course of
its investigation, the Commission became aware of a number of matters
that played no part in the mission 51-L accident but nonetheless hold
a potential for safety problems in the future.

Some of these matters, those involving
operational concerns, were brought directly to the Commission's
attention by the NASA astronaut office. They were the subject of a
special hearing.

Other areas of concern came to light as the
Commission pursued various lines of investigation in its attempt to
isolate the cause of the accident. These inquiries examined such
aspects as the development and operation of each of the elements of
the Space Shuttle-the Orbiter, its main engines and the External
Tank; the procedures employed in the processing and assembly of 51-L,
and launch damage.

This chapter examines potential risks in two
general areas. The first embraces critical aspects of a Shuttle
flight; for example, considerations related to a possible premature
mission termination during the ascent phase and the risk factors
connected with the demanding approach and landing phase. The other
focuses on testing, processing and assembling the various elements of
the Shuttle.

Ascent: A Critical Phase

The events of flight 51-L dramatically
illustrated the dangers of the first stage of a Space Shuttle ascent.
The accident also focused attention on the issues of Orbiter abort
capabilities and crew escape. Of particular concern to the Commission
are the current abort capabilities, options to improve those
capabilities, options for crew escape and the performance of the
range safety system .

It is not the Commission's intent to
second-guess the Space Shuttle design or try to depict escape
provisions that might have saved the 51-L crew. In fact, the events
that led to destruction of the Challenger progressed very rapidly and
without warning. Under those circumstances, the Commission believes
it is highly unlikely that any of the systems discussed below, or any
combination of those systems, would have saved the flight 51-L
crew.

Abort Capabilities

Various unexpected conditions during ascent
can require premature termination of a Shuttle mission. The method of
termination, or abort, depends upon the nature of the unexpected
condition and when it occurs.

The Space Shuttle is lifted to orbit by thrust
from its two solid rockets and three main engines. The design
criteria for the Shuttle specify that, if a single main engine is
lost at any time between lift off and normal main engine cut off, the
Shuttle must be able to continue to orbit or to execute an intact
abort, that is, make a survivable landing on a runway. That design
requirement has been met. If a single main engine is lost early in
ascent, the Shuttle can return to make an emergency landing at
Kennedy (a return-to-launch-site abort). If the failure occurs later,
the Shuttle can make an emergency landing in Africa or Europe (a
transatlantic abort landing). If the failure occurs during the last
part of the ascent, the Shuttle can proceed around the Earth to a
[ 179 ]
landing in the continental United States (abort once around), or can
continue to a lower-than-planned orbit (abort to orbit). Indeed, if
the failure occurs late enough, the Shuttle will achieve the intended
orbital conditions.

Return-to-Launch-Site Abort . If the termination is necessary because of loss of a
main engine during the first four minutes of flight, the Shuttle has
the capability to fly back to the launch site. It continues downrange
to burn excess propellant, and at the proper point it turns back
toward Florida. The computers shutdown the remaining two engines and
separate the Orbiter from the External Tank, which falls into the
Atlantic Ocean. The Orbiter then glides to a landing on the runway at
the Shuttle Landing Facility at Kennedy.

Transatlantic Abort . During ascent there comes a time when the Shuttle is
too far downrange to fly back to Kennedy. If it suffers an engine
failure after that point, but has not yet achieved enough energy to
continue toward orbit, it will have to land on the other side of the
Atlantic. It will continue on a special flight path until it achieves
the energy necessary to glide to the landing site. At that point the
Shuttle computers will cut off the two remaining engines and separate
the Orbiter from the External Tank. The...

Schematic shows options available to
Space Shuttle crews for aborts in the event of power loss at various
stages in the ascent to space.

[ 180 ] ....Shuttle will
then re-enter the lower atmosphere much like a normal entry. The
landing, however, will be at a pre-selected site in Africa or
Europe.

Design . The
Shuttle design specifications do not require that the Orbiter be able
to manage an intact abort (i.e., make it to a runway) if a second
main engine should fail. If two (or all three) main engines fail
within the first five to six minutes of the flight, the Space Shuttle
will land in water. This maneuver is called a "contingency abort" and
is not believed to be survivable because of damage incurred at water
impact.

The Shuttle design requirements did not
specify that the Shuttle should be able to survive a Solid Rocket
Booster failure. The system has no way to identify when a booster is
about to fail, and no way to get the Orbiter or the crew away from a
failing Solid Rocket Booster.

Crew survival during ascent rests on the
following assumptions:

1. The Solid Rocket Boosters will
work from ignition to planned separation.

2. If more than one main engine fails, the
crew must be able to survive a water landing.

Shuttle Abort Enhancements

Between 1973 and 1983, first stage abort
provisions were assessed many times by all levels of NASA management.
Many methods of saving the Orbiter and/or crew from emergencies
during first stage were considered.

Ejection seats (which afforded only limited
protection during first stage) were provided for the two-man crews of
the Orbital Flight Test program (the first four Shuttle flights).
Other options for "operational" flights carrying crews of five or
more astronauts were considered, but were not implemented because of
limited utility, technical complexity and excessive cost in dollars,
weight or schedule delays.

Because of these factors, NASA adopted the
philosophy that the reliability of first stage ascent must be
assured, and that design and testing must preclude time critical
failures that would require emergency action before normal Solid
Rocket Booster burnout. That philosophy has been reviewed many times
during the Space Shuttle program and is appropriately being
reevaluated, as are all first stage abort options, in light of the
51-L accident.

Early Orbiter Separation

If a problem arose that required the Orbiter
to get away from failing Solid Rocket Boosters, the separation would
have to be performed extremely quickly. Time would be of the essence
for two reasons. First, as 51-L demonstrated, if a problem develops
in a Solid Rocket Booster, it can escalate very rapidly. Second, the
ascent trajectory is carefully designed to control the aerodynamic
loads on the vehicle; very small deviation from the normal path will
produce excessive loads, so if the vehicle begins to diverge from its
path there is very little time (seconds) before structural breakup
will occur.

The normal separation sequence to free the
Shuttle from the rest of the system takes 18 seconds, far too long to
be of use during a firststage contingency. "Fast-separation" was
formally established by Review Item Discrepancy 03.00.151, which
stated the requirement to separate the Orbiter from the External Tank
at any time. The sequence was referred to as fast-separation because
delays required during normal separation were bypassed or drastically
shortened in order to achieve separation in approximately three
seconds. Some risk was accepted to obtain this contingency
capability. Fast-separation was incorporated into the flight
software, so that technically this capability does exist.
Unfortunately, analysis has shown that, if it is attempted while the
Solid Rocket Boosters are still thrusting, the Orbiter will "hang up"
on its aft attach points and pitch violently, with probable loss of
the Orbiter and crew.

In summary, as long as the Solid Rocket
Boosters are still thrusting, fast-separation does not provide a way
to escape. It would be useful during first stage only if Solid Rocket
Booster thrust could first be terminated.

The current concept of fast-separation does,
however, have some use. Contingency aborts resulting from loss of two
or three main engines early in ascent are time-critical, and every
fraction of a second that can be trimmed from the separation sequence
helps. These abort procedures are executed after the Solid Rocket
Boosters are expended, and fast-separation is used to reduce the time
required for separation as the Shuttle must attain entry attitude
very quickly. Unfortunately, all contingency aborts culminate in
water impact.

[ 181 ] Thrust Termination

Thrust termination (or thrust neutralization)
as originally proposed for the Space Shuttle was a concept conceived
for the Titan 3-M booster intended for use in the Manned Orbiting
Laboratory Program. The objective of thrust termination is to either
extinguish or reduce the thrust of the Solid Rocket Booster in an
emergency situation. With this thrust terminated, emergency options
such as crew ejection or fast-separation might become feasible during
the first two minutes of flight.

The principal drawback is that thrust
termination itself introduces high dynamic loads that could cause
Shuttle structural components to fail. Early design reviews suggested
that to strengthen the Orbiter to withstand the stresses caused by
rapid thrust termination would require an additional, prohibitive
19,600 pounds. Thrust termination was deleted from design
consideration on April 27, 1973, by Space Shuttle Directive SS00040.
Key factors in the decision were that (l) proper design would be
stressed to prevent Solid Rocket Booster failure and (2) other
firststage ascent systems provided enough redundancy to allow
delaying an abort until after the Solid Rocket Boosters burned
out.

The subject arose again in 1979 when Space
Shuttle Directive S13141 required the system contractor to determine
the time over which thrust reduction must be spread so that the
deceleration loads would not destroy the Orbiter. Marshall analyzed
the thrust decay curves submitted by the contractor and concluded
that achieving the required thrust decay rates was
impractical.

On July 12, 1982, the Associate Administrator
for Space Transportation Systems requested reconsideration of thrust
termination. Gerald Griffin, director of Johnson, responded to the
request in a letter dated September 9, 1982, as follows:

"In our opinion, further study of
a thrust termination system for the SRB [Solid Rocket Booster] would
not be productive. The potential failure modes which could result in
a set of conditions requiring SRB thrust termination are either very
remote or a result of primary structural failure. The structural
failure risk would normally be accepted as a part of the factor of
safety verification by analysis or test. In addition, any thrust
termination system is going to be extremely heavy, very costly and,
at best, present some risk to the Orbiter and ET [External Tank].
Venting of' trot gases and the shock load or pressure spike, have the
potential for being as great a hazard as the problem to be corrected.
It does not appear that a practical approach exists for achieving the
desired pressure decay rate without a major redesign of the
motor." 1

In retrospect, the possibility of Solid Rocket
Booster failures was neither very remote nor limited to primary
structural failure.

Although it would not have helped on mission
51-L, thrust termination is the key to any successful first-stage
abort, and new ideas and technologies should be examined. If a thrust
termination system is eventually deemed feasible (that is, the
Orbiter/External Tank will still be intact after the rapid
deceleration), it cannot have failure modes that would cause an
uncommanded neutralization of the thrust of one or both of the Solid
Rocket Boosters. If thrust termination were to be implemented,
reliable detection mechanisms and reliable decision criteria would be
mandatory.

Ditching

As previously discussed, most contingency
aborts (those resulting from failure of two or three main engines
during the first five to six minutes of flight) result in a water
landing, or ditching. In addition, if the Space Shuttle did have a
thrust termination capability to use with fast-separation to allow it
to separate from failing solid rockets, the Orbiter would have to
ditch in the water unless the failure occurred during a small window
50-70 seconds after launch. Accordingly, whether the crew can survive
a water impact is a critical question.

In 1974 and 1975, ditching studies were
conducted at Langley Research Center. Although test limitations
precluded definitive conclusions, the studies suggested that the
loads at water impact would be high. The deceleration would most
probably cause structural failure of the crew cabin support ties to
the fuselage, which would impede crew egress and possibly flood the
cabin. Furthermore, payloads in the cargo bay are not designed to
withstand decelerations as high as those expected,
2 and would very possibly break free and travel forward
to the crew cabin. The Langley report does state that the Orbiter
shape and mass [ 182 ] properties are good for ditching, but given the
structural problems and deceleration loads, that is little
consolation.

Orbiter ditching was discussed by the Crew
Safety Panel and at Orbiter flight techniques meetings before the
first Shuttle flight. The consensus of these groups was that (1)
ditching is more hazardous than suggested by the early Langley tests,
and (2) ditching is probably not survivable.

This view was reiterated in the September 9,
1982, letter from Griffin to Abrahamson:

"We also suggest no further effort
be expended to study bailout or ditching. There is considerable doubt
that either case is technically feasible with the present Orbiter
design. Even if a technical solution can be found, the impact of
providing either capability is so severe in terms of cost and
schedule as to make them impractical."

There is no evidence that a Shuttle crew would
survive a water impact. Since all contingency aborts and all first
stage abort capabilities that are being studied culminate in a water
impact, an additional provision for crew escape before impact should
also be considered.

Astronaut Paul Weitz expressed this before the
Commission on April 3, 1986:

"My feeling is so strong that the
Orbiter will not survive a ditching, and that includes land, water or
any unprepared surface....

"I think if we put the crew in a position
where they're going to be asked to do a contingency abort, then they
need some means to get out of the vehicle before it contacts earth,
the surface of the earth." 3

Crew Escape Options

In a study conducted before the Orbiter
contract was awarded, Rockwell International evaluated a range of
ejection systems (Rockwell International, Incorporated, Phase B
Study, 1971). The table shows the results comparing three systems:
ejection seats, encapsulated ejection seats and a separable crew
compartment. The development costs are in 1971 dollars, and the costs
and weights cited were those required to incorporate these systems
into the developing Orbiter design, not to modify an existing
Orbiter.

The only system that could provide protection
for more than the two-man experimental flight crew was the separable
crew compartment, which would add substantial weight and development
cost. All of these systems had limitations in their ability to
provide successful escape, and all would require advance warning of
an impending hazard from reliable data sources.

The Request for Proposal, written in April,
1971 (reference paragraph 1.3.6.2.1), states: "Provisions shall be
made for rapid emergency egress of the crew during development test
flights." Ejection seats were selected as the emergency escape
system. The objective was to offer the crew some protection, though
limited, from risks of the test flights. The philosophy was that
after the test flights, all unknowns would be resolved, and the
vehicle would be certified for "operational" flights.

Conventional ejection seats similar to those
installed in the Lockheed F-12/SR-71 were selected shortly after the
Orbiter contract was awarded. They were subsequently incorporated
into Columbia and were available for the first four flights. The
ejection could be initiated by either crew member and would be used
in the event of.....

1971 Rockwell Data on Ejection
Systems

.

Type

Altitude (feet)

Velocity (feet/sec)

Weight (pounds)

Development Cost

.

Open Ejection Seat

< 60,000

< 2,000

1,760

$10,000,000

B-70 Encapsulated Seat

< 100,000

< 3,000

5,200

$7,000,000

Separable Crew Compartment

< 100,000

8,000 or more

14,000

$292,000,000

[ 183 ] .....uncontrolled
flight, on-board fire or pending landings on unprepared surfaces. The
escape sequence required approximately 15 seconds for the crew to
recognize pending disaster, initiate the sequence and get a safe
distance away from the vehicle.

Although the seats were originally intended
for use during first-stage ascent or during gliding flight below
100,000 feet, analysis showed that the crew would be exposed to the
Solid Rocket Booster and main engine exhaust plumes if they ejected
during ascent. During descent, the seats provided good protection
from about 100,000 feet to landing.

After the Space Shuttle completed the four
test flights it was certified for"operational" flights. But missions
for the "operational" flights required more crew members, and there
were no known ejection systems, other than an entire cabin escape
module, that could remove the entire crew within the necessary time.
The Orbiter configuration allowed room for only two ejection seats on
the flight deck. With alternative ejection concepts and redesign of
the flight deck, this number might have been increased slightly, but
not to the full crew size. Thus, because of' limited utility during
first- stage ascent and inability to accommodate a full crew, the
ejection seats were eliminated for operational flights.

The present Shuttle has no means for crew
escape, either during first-stage ascent or during gliding flight.
Conventional ejection seats do not appear to be viable Space Shuttle
options because they severely limit the crew size and, therefore,
prevent the Space Shuttle from accomplishing its mission objectives.
The remaining options fall into three categories:

1. Escape Module. The entire crew
compartment would be separated from the Orbiter and descend by
parachute.

2. Rocket-assisted Extraction. Many military
aircraft employ a system using a variety of small rocket-assisted
devices to boost occupants from the plane. Such a system could be
used in the Orbiter.

3. Bail-Out System. The crew can exit
unassisted through a hatch during controlled, gliding flight.

Only one of these, the escape module, offers
the possibility of escape during first-stage ascent.

Its use would probably be practical only after
thrust termination. It should be noted that in all cases of crew
escape, the Orbiter would be lost, but in cases of Solid Rocket
Booster failure or Orbiter ditching the vehicle would be lost anyway.
The utility and feasibility of each method are described
below.

An escape module can offer an opportunity for
crew escape at all altitudes during a first-stage time-critical
emergency if the escape system itself is not damaged to the point
that it cannot function. The module must be sufficiently far from the
vehicle at the time of catastrophe that neither it nor its descent
system is destroyed. Incorporation of an escape module would require
significant redesign of the Orbiter: some structural reinforcement,
pyrotechnic devices to sever the escape module from the rest of the
Orbiter, modifications to sever connections that supply power and
fluids, separation rockets and a parachute system. An additional
weight penalty would result from the requirement to add mass in the
rear of the Orbiter to compensate for the forward shift in the c
enter of gravity. Recent estimates indicate this could add as much as
30,000 pounds to the weight of' the Orbiter. 4 This increase in weight would reduce payload capacity
considerably, perhaps unacceptably. There is no current estimate of
the attendant cost.

An escape module does theoretically offer the
widest range of' crew escape options. The other two options, rocket
extraction and bail-out, arc only practical during gliding flight.
Both methods would be useful when the Orbiter could not reach a
prepared runway, for they would allow the crew to escape before a
very hazardous landing or a water ditching. Aerodynamic model tests
showed that a crew member bailing out through either the side or
overhead hatch would subsequently contact the wing, tail or orbital
maneuvering system pod unless he or she could exit with sufficient
velocity (> 5 to 10 feet per second) to avoid these obstacles.
Slides and pendant rocket systems were evaluated as means of'
providing this velocity, but all concepts of bail-out and rocket
extraction that were studied require many minutes to get the entire
crew out and would be practical only during controlled gliding
flight. The results of these studies were presented at the Program
Requirements Change Board session held on May 12, 1983, and
subsequently to the NASA administrator, but none of the alternatives
was [ 184 ] implemented because of limited capability and
resulting program impacts.

There is much discussion and disagreement over
which escape systems are feasible, or whether any provide protection
against a significant number of failure modes.

The astronauts testifying before the
Commission on April 3, 1986, agreed that it does not appear practical
to modify the Orbiter to incorporate an escape module. The astronauts
disagreed, however, about which of the other two systems would be
preferable. As Astronaut Weitz testified:

"John [Astronaut John Young] likes
the rocket extraction system because it does cover a wider flight
regime and allows you to get out perhaps with the vehicle only under
partial control as opposed to complete control; however, any system
that adds more parts like rockets gets more complex.... The only kind
of a system that I think is even somehow feasible would be maybe some
kind of a bail-out system that could be used
subsonic." 5

In its 1982 Annual Report, the Aerospace
Safety Advisory Panel listed "crew escape . . . at launch and prior
to potential ditching" 6 as a priority item that warranted further study. The
Commission fully supports such studies. In particular, the Commission
believes that the crew should have a means of escaping the Orbiter in
controlled, gliding flight. The Commission thinks it crucial that the
vehicle that will carry astronauts into orbit through this decade and
the next incorporate systems that provide some chance for crew
survival in emergencies. It nonetheless accepts the following point
made by Astronaut Robert Crippen:

"I don't know of an escape system
that would have saved the crew from the particular incident that we
just went through [the Challenger accident] . " 7

Range Safety

Television coverage of the Challenger accident
vividly showed the Solid Rocket Boosters emerging from the ball of
fire and smoke. The erratic and uncontrolled powered flight of such
large components could have posed a potential danger to populated
areas. The responsible official accordingly destroyed the Solid
Rocket Boosters.

To understand how the booster rockets were
destroyed, one must understand the purpose of a range safety system,
its functions, and the special considerations that apply to Shuttle
launches.

The Eastern Space and Missile Center operates
a range safety system for all Department of Defense and NASA launch
activities in the Cape Canaveral area. The primary responsibility of
the range safety system, run by the U.S. Air Force, is to protect
people and property from abnormal vehicle flights during first stage
ascent.

To fulfill its range safety responsibilities,
the Eastern Space and Missile Center staff supervises on-site launch
preparations and tracks rockets and vehicles until they are far
enough away from populated areas to remove any danger. When such a
danger arises during the ascent stage of a launch, the vehicle may
have to be destroyed to minimize harm to persons and property on the
ground. Every major vehicle flown from the Cape Canaveral area has
carried an explosive destruct system that could be armed and fired by
the range safety officer.

Range safety procedures in launch activities
from Kennedy are governed by Department of Defense and NASA
documents. The primary regulatory publication is DOD Document
3200.11, Use, Management, and Operation of DOD Major Ranges and Test
Facilities.

Space Shuttle Range Safety
System

Both Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Boosters and
the External Tank are fitted with explosive charges. These can be
detonated on the command of the range safety officer if the vehicle
crosses the limits established by flight analysis before launch and
the vehicle is no longer in controlled flight. The determination of
controllability is made by the flight director in Mission Control,
Houston, who is in communication with the range safety officer.
Following an encoded"arm" command, the existing package on the
Shuttle System is detonated by a subsequent encoded "fire"
command.

The range safety officer who sends the
commands is the key decision maker who is finally responsible for
preventing loss of life and property that could result if the vehicle
or components should fall in populated areas. The destruct criteria
are agreed to by NASA and the Eastern Space and Missile
Center.

[ 185 ] A range safety
system for the Shuttle launches was approved in concept in 1974.
Under that concept, the capability to destroy the system in
flight....

Drawing shows position of linear
shaped charges and range safety command antennas on Solid Rocket
Boosters and External Tank.

....from the ground was to be installed in the
form of radio detonated explosive charges triggered by encoded
signals. Such a range safety package appeared necessary for a variety
of reasons based upon the initial Shuttle design that included
ejection seats. If the crew were to eject, the unmanned vehicle would
be uncontrollable and thus a much greater danger than a manned
system.

After the first four test flights, however,
the ejection seats were deactivated. Retaining the range safety
package when the crew could no longer escape was an emotional and
controversial decision. In retrospect, however, the Challenger
accident has demonstrated the need for some type of range safety
measure. Since the current range safety system does not allow for
selective destruction of components, the Commission believes that
NASA and the Air Force should critically re-examine whether the
destruct package on the External Tank might be removed.

Range Safety Activities, January 28,
1986

The range safety officer for the Challenger
flight on January 28 was Maj. Gerald F. Bieringer, U.S. Air Force. He
reported that the mission was normal until about 76 seconds after
launch. The following description is from Maj. Bieringer's written
statement prepared approximately two hours after the accident:

"Watching the IP [impact point]
displays and optics I observed the primary and alternate sources
diverge significantly at about T + 76 [76 seconds into the flight].
At about the same time I heard . . [through monitored communications]
the vehicle had exploded. Concurrently, I saw the explosion on the
video monitor on my right. A white cloud seemed to envelop the
vehicle, small pieces exploded out of it. The IP displays PRI and ALT
indications were jumping around wildly I was about to recommend we do
nothing as it appeared the entire vehicle had exploded when I
observed what appeared to be an SRB [Solid Rocket Booster] stabilized
and flying toward the upper left corner of the display. As it
appeared stabilized I felt it might endanger land or shipping and as
the ET [External Tank] had apparently exploded I recommended to the
SRSO [senior range safety officer] we send functions. I sent ARM,
waited about 10 seconds, and sent FIRE.... FIRE was sent at about 110
[seconds].'' 8

During the flight and prior to the accident,
tracking and control functions performed normally. There were no
communications problems throughout the range or with the NASA flight
dynamics officer in Mission Control Houston.

Range safety data displays did not provide
useful information immediately after the accident. The range safety
officer depended upon the video displays for evidence concerning the
performance of the Solid Rocket Boosters. Without that information,
the range safety officer would not have sent the destruct signals.
Detailed studies from Marshall had indicated that Solid Rocket
Boosters would tumble if prematurely separated. That assumption made
possible the prediction of impact points. When the Challenger Solid
Rocket Boosters separated after the explosion, however, they
continued powered, stabilized flight and did not tumble, contrary to
the expectations upon which range safety rules had been based Without
the live television pictures, the range safety officer would not have
known about the unexpected performance of' the boosters

The Eastern Space and Missile Center and NASA
have appropriately initiated a comprehensive [ 186 ] review of the
Shuttle range safety requirements and their implementation. The
events of' the Challenger accident demonstrate the need for a range
safety package of some type on the Solid Rocket Boosters. However,
the review should examine whether technology exists that would allow
combining the range safety function for the Solid Rocket Boosters
with a thrust termination system, and whether, if technically
feasible, it would be desirable.

Postflight Analysis

The Mission Control Center in Houston had no
more warning of' the impending disaster than the range safety officer
had. All information that might be useful in recognizing problems
that the crew or the mission control flight team could do something
about is available to flight controllers during the launch, but that
information constitutes only a fraction of the electronic data being
telemetered from the Shuttle. To ensure that nothing was overlooked
during the launch, Johnson flight controllers conducted a thorough
analysis of the telemetry data on January 29 and 30, 1986.

Their review of the recorded events revealed
that the chamber pressure inside the right Solid Rocket Booster began
to differ from that of the left booster approximately 60 seconds
after lift off. A sampling of that information is available to a
flight controller during ascent, but the internal pressures of the
boosters are normally not monitored during the first stage. The
readings are used only to indicate whether the crew can expect an
on-time or slightly delayed separation of the boosters from the
Orbiter and External Tank. The difference in pressure during the
brief ascent of Challenger was small, and pressures were within
acceptable limits.

The replay of the data also indicated that the
vehicle flight control system was responding properly to external
forces and continued to control the Shuttle until the accident. No
unusual motion responses occurred, and inside the cockpit there were
no alarms. There are no indications that the crew had any warning of
a problem before the fire and the disintegration of the Space
Shuttle.

Findings

1. The Space Shuttle System was not designed
to survive a failure of the Solid Rocket Boosters. There are no
corrective actions that can be taken if the boosters do not operate
properly after ignition, i.e., there is no ability to separate an
Orbiter safely from thrusting boosters and no ability for the crew to
escape the vehicle during first-stage ascent.

Neither the Mission Control Team nor the
51-L crew had any warning of impending disaster.

Even if there had been warning, there were
no actions available to the crew or the Mission Control Team to
avert the disaster.

Landing: Another Critical Phase

The consequences of faulty performance in any
dynamic and demanding flight environment can be catastrophic. The
Commission was concerned that an insufficient safety margin may have
existed in areas other than Shuttle ascent. Entry and landing of the
Shuttle are dynamic and demanding with all the risks and
complications inherent in flying a heavyweight glider with a very
steep glide path. Since the Shuttle crew cannot divert to any
alternate landing site after entry, the landing decision must be both
timely and accurate. In addition, the landing gear, which includes
wheels, tires and brakes, must function properly. These
considerations will be discussed for both normal and abort
landings.

Abort Site Weather

The acceptability of the weather at abort
landing sites, both inside and outside the continental United States,
is a critical factor in the launch decision process. The local
weather minima for the actual launch are necessarily restrictive. The
minima for acceptably safe abort landings are even more restrictive.
Of course, the wider the range of acceptable weather conditions, the
greater the possibility of launch on any given day. As a result of
past efforts to increase the likelihood of launch, abort landing
weather criteria are currently less restrictive than the criteria for
planned landings.

The program also allows consideration of
launching with a light rain shower over the Kennedy runway. Although
engineering assessments [ 187 ] indicate that the
tile damage that would result would not affect Shuttle
controllability, it would be a serious setback to the program in
terms of budget and schedule. This rule is designed to allow the
program to weigh the probability of a return-to-launch-site abort and
decide whether it is worthwhile to launch and accept the risk of a
setback because of tile damage should a return-to-launch-site abort
be required. This risk appears to be unnecessary.

The programmatic decision to accept worse
weather for an abort landing, in a situation where other conditions
are also less than optimal, is not consistent with a conservative
approach to flight safety. The desire to launch is understandable,
and abort landings are indeed improbable. However, if an abort is
required, it is irrelevant that it was unlikely. An emergency, the
loss of a Space Shuttle Main Engine, has already occurred to produce
the necessity. Abort situations will require landing under emergency
conditions on limited runways with Orbiter weights higher than
normal. The difficulties should not be compounded by high crosswinds
or reduced visibility. The Commission recommended that this subject
be reviewed, and those reviews are currently underway.

Orbiter Tires and Brakes

The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel has shared
NASA's concern over the Orbiter wheels, tires and brakes since the
beginning of the Shuttle program. This is summarized in its 1982
Annual Report.

"The landing gear including wheels, tires, and
brakes is vital for safe completion of any mission. With the future
flights going to higher weights and lower margins, possibly even
negative margins, it is imperative that existing capabilities be
fully explored, documented and improved where necessary."
9

Orbiter Tires

Orbiter tires are manufactured by B. F.
Goodrich and are designed to support a Space Shuttle landing up to
240,000 pounds at 225 knots with 20 knots of crosswind. The tires
have a 34-ply rating using 16 cords. Though they have successfully
passed testing programs, they have shown excessive wear during
landings at Kennedy, especially when crosswinds were involved.

The tires are rated as Criticality 1 because
loss of a single tire could cause loss of control and subsequent loss
of vehicle and crew.

Based upon approach and landing test
experience, crosswind testing was added to the Space Shuttle tire
certification testing. To date, Orbiters have landed with a maximum
of 8 knots of crosswind at the Kennedy runway resulting in heavy tire
wear: both spinup wear that occurs initially at touchdown and
crosswind wear induced by side forces and differential braking. While
dynamometer tests indicated that these tires should withstand
conditions well above the design specification, the tests have not
been able to simulate runway surface effects accurately. A Langley
Research Center test track has been used to give a partial simulation
of the strains caused by a landing at Kennedy. This test apparatus
will be upgraded for further testing in the summer of 1986 in an
attempt to include all the representative flight loads and
conditions.

The tires have undergone extensive testing to
examine effects of vacuum exposure, temperature extremes, and cuts.
They also have undergone leakage, side force, load, storage, and
durability tests. The tires have qualified in all these areas.

To date, tests using the simulated Kennedy
runway at Langley indicate that spinup wear by itself will not lead
to tire failure. Tests using the Kennedy test surface do indicate
that spinup wear is worse if the tire is subjected to crosswind. For
this reason, the crosswind allowable for normal landings is limited
to 10 knots. This restriction also permits a safe stop if the
nosewheel steering system fails. The limitation is being reviewed to
see if it is too high for abort landings involving nosewheel steering
failure. Testing has not been conducted to ensure that excessive
crosswind wear will not be a hazard when landing on the various hard
surface runways with maximum crosswinds and failed nosewheel
steering.

Main tire loads are increased substantially
after nosewheel touchdown because of the large downward wing force at
its negative angle of attack. The total force on each side can be
nearly 200,000 pounds, which exceeds the capability of a single tire.
In fact, the touchdown loads alone can exceed the load bearing
ability of a single tire. The obvious result is that if a single tire
fails before nosegear touchdown, the vehicle will have serious if not
catastrophic directional control problems following the expected
failure of the [ 188 ] adjacent tire. This failure case has led to a
Criticality 1 rating on the tires. Before nosegear touchdown, control
is maintained through the rudder. However, it loses effectiveness as
the speedbrake is opened and the vehicle decelerates. After nosegear
touchdown, simulations have shown that directional control is
possible using the nosewheel steering system for most subsequent
failures, but not for some cases in which crosswinds exceed the
current flight rule limits. Because of the consequences of this
failure, crew members strongly recommend that the nosewheel steering
system be modified to achieve full redundancy.

Tire side loads have been difficult to measure
and subsequently model because of test facility limitations. Two
mathematical models were developed from early dynamometer tests and
extrapolation from nosewheel tire tests. New dynamic tests of main
gear tires show a more flexible side response, which has been
incorporated into the latest mathematical model. A reasonably
accurate model is required both for nosewheel steering engineering
studies and for crew training simulators.

The Orbiter tire in use meets specifications
and has been certified through testing. However, testing has not
reproduced results observed on Kennedy runways. To date, the only
blown tire has been caused by a brake lockup and the resulting skid
wear.

Several improvements have been considered to
increase protection against the high-speed blowntire case. One would
add a skid at the bottom of the main gear strut to take the peak load
during nosegear touchdown; another would add a roll-on-rim capability
to the main gear wheel. None of the possible improvements has been
funded, however, nor has any been seriously studied.

In summary, two blown tires before nosegear
touchdown would likely be catastrophic, and the potential for that
occurrence should be minimized. NASA has directed testing in the fall
of 1986 to examine actual tire, wheel, and strut failures to better
understand this failure case.

Orbiter Brakes

The Orbiter brake design chosen in 1973 was
based on the Orbiter's design weight. It used beryllium rotors and
stators with carbon lining. However, as the actual Orbiter weight
grew, the response from the Shuttle program management was not a
redesign of the brakes, but an extension of required runway length
from 10,000 to 12,500 feet. Thus, the brakes for many years have been
known to have little or no margin, even if they performed as
originally designed.

There are four brake assemblies, one for each
main landing gear wheel. Each assembly uses four rotors and three
stators, the stators being attached to a torque tube. Carbon pads are
attached to provide the friction surface. The Orbiter brakes were
designed to absorb 36.5 million foot-pounds of energy for normal
stops and 55.5 million footpounds of energy for one emergency stop.
The brakes were tested and qualified using standard dynamometer
tests.

Actual flight experience has shown brake
damage on most flights. The damage is classified by cause as either
dynamic or thermal. The dynamic damage is usually characterized by
damage to rotors and carbon lining chipping, plus beryllium and pad
retainer cracks. On the other hand, the thermal damage has been due
to heating of the stator caused by energy absorption during braking.
The beryllium becomes ductile and has a much reduced yield strength
at temperatures possible during braking. Both types of damage are
typical of early brake development problems experienced in the
aviation industry.

Brake damage has required that special crew
procedures be developed to assure successful braking. To minimize
dynamic damage and to keep any loose parts together, the crews are
told to hold the brakes on constantly from the time of first
application until their speed slows to about 40 knots. For a normal
landing, braking is initiated at about 130 knots. For abort landings,
braking would be initiated at about 150 knots. Braking speeds are
established to avoid exceeding the temperature limits of the stator.
The earlier the brakes are applied, the higher the heat rate. The
longer the brakes are applied, the higher the temperature will be, no
matter what the heat rate. To minimize problems, the commander must
get the brake energy into the brakes at just the right rate and just
the right time-before the beryllium yields and causes a low-speed
wheel lockup.

At a Commission hearing on April 3, 1986,
Astronaut John Young described the problem the Shuttle commander has
with the system:

"It is very difficult to use
precisely right now. In fact, we're finding out we don't really
[ 189 ]
have a good technique for applying the brakes.... We don't believe
that astronauts or pilots should be able to break the brakes."
10

Missions 5, 51-D and 61-C had forms of thermal
stator damage. The mission 51 -D case resulted in a low-speed wheel
lockup and a subsequent blown tire at Kennedy. The mission 61-C case
did not progress to a lockup but came very close. The amount of brake
energy that can be obtained using normal braking procedures is about
40 million foot-pounds before the first stator fails. The mission
61-C damage occurred at 34 million foot-pounds but had not progressed
to the lockup condition. Inspection of failed stators clearly shows
the ductile failure response of the beryllium, and, hence, it appears
that this failure mechanism cannot contribute to a high-speed lockup
and subsequent tire failure. It should be noted that the brake
specification called for a maximum energy of 55 million foot-pounds.
Qualification testing of the abort braking profile showed that 55
million foot-pounds was the point of first stator failure. During
qualification tests, the brakes continued to operate until all
stators failed, providing about another 5 million footpounds of
energy. Based upon the thermal response of beryllium under load, it
appears that the early heavy braking required for transatlantic abort
landings produces more than the 40 million foot-pounds that have
resulted in thermal failure of the brakes during the normal braking
profile. No numbers are certain, however, and clearly the
qualification testing did not point out the current thermal
problems.

The assumed normal and abort brake energy
limits for the current design should be reinvestigated. The 61-C
damage resulted from only 34 million foot-pounds of energy. If this
same brake design is to continue to fly, the mission 61-C damage
should be fully understood, and destructive testing should be
accomplished to establish the short runway (transatlantic abort
landing) brake limit and appropriate abort landing planning
factors.

NASA is considering stator improvements,
including steel or thicker beryllium stators, and has undertaken a
carbon brake program that would provide a major margin improvement
and less dynamic damage because of fewer parts. Additional testing is
currently underway, and more is planned, to evaluate these brake
modifications and to perform destructive testing. The testing results
are expected to conform more closely to flight conditions because
landing gear dynamics have been included. Early tests have confirmed
the energy levels for the abort braking profile with a modified
brake, and future tests may provide confidence in the normal braking
profile.

The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel recognized
NASA's efforts in its 1985 Annual Report:

"A carbon brake review was
conducted by NASA in early December, 1985, and re-sulted in agreement
to procure a carbon brake system for the Orbiter.... There is concern
by the STS [Space Transportation System] management about the
availability of resources to support the development of the carbon
brakes given the many com-peting requirements and the projected
con-strained budget during the 1986 period. The program management
considers the development of the carbon brake system to be of the
highest priority . . . and the Panel sup-ports this position as it
has in the past." 11

Because of the brake problems encountered in
the program, two reviews have been conducted by NASA. The third
review will take place during the summer of 1986. The review board
members have studied all of the Orbiter brake data and have compared
Orbiter problems to industry problems. Improvements suggested have
been implemented. It is the consensus of NASA and industry experts
that high priority should be placed on correcting Orbiter brake
problems, and that brake redesign should proceed with emphasis on
developing higher energy and torque capacity.

Concern within the program about the entire
deceleration system (landing gear, wheels, tires, brakes and
nosewheel steering) has been the subject of numerous reviews,
meetings and design efforts. These concerns continued to be expressed
by the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel in 1982:

"Studies of Shuttle landings to
date show that tire, wheel and brake stresses are approaching
limits." 12

"Short runways, with inadequate overruns, are
cause for concern, for instance, a transatlantic abort to Dakar."
13

The issues are difficult, and the required
technology is challenging, but most agree that it is appropriate and
important that NASA resolve [ 190 ] each of these
problems. A conservative approach to the landing phase of flight
demands reliable performance by all critical systems.

Kennedy Space Center Landings

The original Space Shuttle plan called for
routine landings at Kennedy to minimize turnaround time and cost per
flight and to provide an efficient operation for both the Shuttle
system and the cargo elements. While those considerations remain
important, other concerns, such as the performance of the Orbiter
tires and brakes, and the difficulty of accurate weather prediction
in Florida, have called the plan into question.

When the Shuttle lands at Edwards Air Force
Base, California, approximately six days are added to the turnaround
time compared with a landing at Kennedy. That is the time required to
load the Orbiter atop the Shuttle carrier aircraft, a specially
modified Boeing 747, and to ferry it back to Florida for
processing.

Returning the Orbiter to Kennedy from Edwards
costs not only time but also money: nearly $1,000,000, not including
the cost of additional ground support equipment, extra security and
other support requirements. Further, the people necessary to
accomplish the turnaround tasks must be drawn from the staffs at
Kennedy and Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. They are the same
people needed for the preparation for subsequent flights.

Returning the Orbiter also imposes an
additional handling risk to the vehicle in both the loading operation
and the ferry flight itself. Encountering light precipitation during
the ferry flight has caused substantial damage to the Orbiter thermal
protection system. These costs and risks, however, are minimal when
compared with those of a Space Shuttle mission.

The Kennedy runway was built to Space Shuttle
design requirements that exceeded all Federal Aviation Administration
requirements and was coordinated extensively with the Air Force,
Dryden Flight Research Center, NASA Headquarters, Johnson, Kennedy,
Marshall and the Army Corps of Engineers. The result is a single
concrete runway, 15,000 feet long and 300 feet wide. The grooved and
coarse brushed surface and the high coefficient of friction provide
an all-weather landing facility.

The Kennedy runway easily meets the intent of
most of the Air Force, Federal Aviation Administration and
International Civil Aviation Organization specification requirements.
According to NASA, it was the best runway that the world knew how to
build when the final design was determined in 1973.

In the past several years, questions about
weather predictability and Shuttle systems performance have
influenced the Kennedy landing issue. Experience gained in the 24
Shuttle landings has raised concerns about the adequacy of the
Shuttle landing and rollout systems: tires, brakes and nosewheel
steering. Tires and brakes have been discussed earlier. The tires
have shown excessive wear after Kennedy landings, where the rough
runway is particularly hard on tires. Tire wear became a serious
concern after the landing of mission 51-D at Kennedy. Spinup wear was
three cords deep, crosswind wear (in only an 8-knot crosswind) was
significant and one tire eventually failed as a result of brake
lock-up and skid.

This excessive wear, coupled with brake
failure, led NASA to schedule subsequent landings at Edwards while
attempting to solve these problems. At the Commission hearing on
April 3, 1986, Clifford Charlesworth, director of Space Operations at
Johnson, stated his reaction to the blown-tire incident:

"Let me say that following 51-D .
. . one of the first things I did was go talk to then program
manager, Mr. Lunney, and say we don't want to try that again until we
understand that, which he completely agreed with, and we launched
into this nosewheel steering development." 14

There followed minor improvements to the
braking system. The nosewheel steering system was also improved, so
that it, rather than differential braking, could be used for
directional control to reduce tire wear.

These improvements were made before mission
61-C, and it was deemed safe for that mission and subsequent missions
to land at Kennedy. Bad weather in Florida required that 61-C land at
Edwards. There were again problems with the brakes, indicating that
the Shuttle braking system was still suspect. Mr. Charlesworth
provided this assessment to the Commission:

"Given the problem that has come
up now with the brakes, I think that whole question still needs some
more work before I would [ 191 ] be satisfied that
yes, we should go back and try to land at the Cape."
15

The nosewheel steering, regarded as fail-safe,
might better be described as fail-passive: at worst, a single failure
will cause the nosewheel to castor. Thus, a single failure in
nosewheel steering, coupled with failure conditions that require its
use, could result in departure from the runway. There is a long-range
program to improve the nosewheel steering so that a single failure
will leave the system operational.

Eight flights have been launched with plans to
land in Florida. Of those, three have been diverted to California
because of bad weather. Moreover, it is indicative of the dynamic
weather environment in Florida that twice in the program's history
flights have been waved off for one orbit to allow for weather
conditions to improve enough to be acceptable for landing. Thus, even
if NASA eventually were to resume routine operations at Kennedy,
experience indicates the Orbiter will divert into Edwards more than
30 percent of the time. NASA must therefore plan to use Edwards
routinely. This requires reserving six days in the post-landing
processing schedule for the Orbiter's ferry trip back to Florida. It
also requires redundancy in the ferry aircraft. The single Shuttle
carrier aircraft, with some one-of-a-kind support items, is presently
the only way to get the Orbiter from California back to its launch
site in Florida.

Landing Site Changes

.

Mission

Wave-offs

Reason

Scheduled Landing

Actual Landing

.

STS-3

1

Flooding

Edwards

Northrup Strip, (New
Mexico)

STS-7

2

Rain/ceiling

Kennedy

Edwards

STS 41-C

1

Rain/ceiling

Kennedy

Edwards

STS 61-C

5

Rain/ceiling

Kennedy

Edwards

The most serious concern is not that the
weather in Florida is bad, but that the atmospheric conditions are
frequently unpredictable. Captain Robert Crippen testified before the
Commission on April 3, 1986:

"I don't think the astronaut
office would disagree with the premise that you are much safer
landing at Edwards. There are some things you could do, as was
indicated, to make Kennedy better, but you're never going to overcome
the weather unpredictability." 16

Once the Shuttle performs the deorbit burn, it
is going to land approximately 60 minutes later; there is no way to
return to orbit, and there is no option to select another landing
site. This means that the weather forecaster must analyze the landing
site weather nearly one and one-half hours in advance of landing, and
that the forecast must be accurate. Unfortunately, the Florida
weather is particularly difficult to forecast at certain times of the
year. In the spring and summer, thunderstorms build and dissipate
quickly and unpredictably. Early morning fog also is very difficult
to predict if the forecast must be made in the hour before
sunrise.

In contrast, the stable weather patterns at
Edwards make the forecaster's job much easier.

Although NASA has a conservative philosophy,
and applies conservative flight rules in evaluating end-of-mission
weather, the decision always comes down to evaluating a weather
forecast. There is a risk associated with that. If the program
requirements put forecasters in the position of predicting weather
when weather is unpredictable, it is only a matter of time before the
crew is allowed to leave orbit and arrive in Florida to find
thunderstorms or rapidly forming ground fog. Either could be
disastrous.

The weather at Edwards, of course, is not
always acceptable for landing either. In fact, only days prior to the
launch of STS-3, NASA was forced to shift the normal landing site
from Edwards to Northrup Strip, New Mexico, because of flooding of
the Edwards lakebed. This points out the need to support fully both
Kennedy and Edwards as potential end-of-mission landing sites.

In summary, although there are valid
programmatic reasons to land routinely at Kennedy, there are concerns
that suggest that this is not wise under the present circumstances.
While planned landings at Edwards carry a cost in dollars and days,
the realities of weather cannot be ignored. Shuttle program officials
must recognize that Edwards is a permanent, essential part of the
program. The cost associated with regular, scheduled landing and
turnaround operations at Edwards is thus a necessary program
cost.

Decisions governing Space Shuttle operations
must be consistent with the philosophy that unnecessary risks have to
be eliminated. Such [ 192 ] decisions cannot be
made without a clear understanding of margins of safety in each part
of the system.

Unfortunately, margins of safety cannot be
assured if' performance characteristics are not thoroughly
understood, nor can they be deduced from a previous flight's
"success."

The Shuttle Program cannot afford to operate
outside its experience in the areas of tires, brakes, and weather,
with the capabilities of the system today. Pending a clear
understanding of all landing and deceleration systems, and a
resolution of the problems encountered to date in Shuttle landings,
the most conservative course must be followed in order to minimize
risk during this dynamic phase of flight.

Shuttle Elements

The Space Shuttle Main Engine teams at
Marshall and Rocketdyne have developed engines that have achieved
their performance goals and have performed extremely well.
Nevertheless the main engines continue to be highly complex and
critical components of the Shuttle that involve an element of risk
principally because important components of the engines degrade more
rapidly with flight use than anticipated. Both NASA and Rocketdyne
have taken steps to contain that risk. An important aspect of the
main engine program has been the extensive "hot fire" ground tests.
Unfortunately, the vitality of the test program has been reduced
because of budgetary constraints.

The ability of the engine to achieve its
programed design life is verified by two test engines. These "fleet
leader" engines are test fired with sufficient frequency that they
have twice as much operational experience as any flight engine. Fleet
leader tests have demonstrated that most engine components have an
equivalent 40-flight service life. As part of the engine test
program, mayor components are inspected periodic ally and replaced if
wear or damage warrants. Fleet leader tests have established that the
low-pressure fuel turbopump and the low-pressure oxidizer pump have
lives limited to the equivalent of 28 and 22 flights, respectively.
The high-pressure fuel turbopump is limited to six flights before
overhaul; the high-pressure oxidizer pump is limited to less than six
flights. 17 An active program of flight engine inspection and
component replacement has been effectively implemented by Rocketdyne,
based on the results of' the fleet leader engine test program.

The life-limiting items on the high-pressure
pumps are the turbine blades, impellers, seals and bearings.
Rocketdyne has identified cracked turbine blades in the high -
pressure pumps as a primary concern. The contractor has been working
to improve the pumps' reliability by increasing bearing and turbine
blade life and improving dynamic stability. While considerable
progress has been made, the desired level of turbine blade life has
not yet been achieved. A number of' improvements achieved as a result
of the fleet leader program are now ready for incorporation in the
Space Shuttle Main Engines used in future flights, but have not been
implemented due to fiscal constraints. 18 Immediate implementation of these improvements would
allow incorporation before the next Shuttle flight.

The number of engine test firings per month
has decreased over the past two years. Yet this test program has not
yet demonstrated the limits of engine operation parameters or
included tests over the full operating envelope to show full engine
capability. In addition, tests have not yet been deliberately
conducted to the point of failure to determine actual engine
operating margins.

The Orbiter has also performed well. There is,
however, one serious potential failure mode related to the disconnect
valves between the Orbiter and the External Tank. The present design
includes two 17-inch diameter valves, one controlling the oxygen
flow, and the other the hydrogen flow from the tank to the Orbiter's
three engines. Each of the disconnect valves has two flappers that
close off the flow of the liquid hydrogen and oxygen when the
External Tank separates from the Orbiter. An inadvertent closure by
any of the four flappers during normal engine operation would cause a
catastrophe due to rupture of the supply line and/or tank. New
designs are under study, incorporating modifications to prevent
inadvertent valve closures. Redesigned valves could be qualified,
certified and available for use on the Shuttle's next flight.

While the External Tank has performed
flawlessly during all Shuttle flights, one area of concern pertains
to the indicators for the two valves which vent the liquid hydrogen
and liquid oxygen. These valves can indicate they are closed when
they might be partially open. This condition [ 193 ] is potentially
hazardous, since leaks of either gaseous oxygen or hydrogen prior to
launch, or in flight, could lead to fires. This could, in turn, lead
to catastrophic failure of the External Tank. NASA is currently
studying design modifications to the valve position indicators. This
effort could be expedited and the redesigned indicators installed
before the next flight of the Shuttle.

Processing and Assembly

During the processing and assembly of the
elements of flight 51-L, various problems were seen in the
Commission's review which could bear on the safety of future
flights.

Structural Inspections

During the 51-L processing, waivers were
granted on 60 of 146 required Orbiter structural inspections. Seven
of these waivers were second-time waivers of inspections.

A formal structural inspection plan for the
Shuttle fleet had not been fully developed, and not all of the 146
inspections had been scheduled for the 51-L processing. In order to
minimize the flight delay until the implementation plan could be
fully developed, the waivers were documented, requested and granted
by Level II at Johnson.

The structural inspection requirements are
relatively new and not completely mature. A working group was formed
in December 1985, to expedite a structural inspection plan. A plan
now exists for future structural inspections. The Commission believes
that these inspections should not be waived. The fleet of Orbiters
has no counterpart anywhere in the world. There is no data base
relative to reusable spacecraft. The Orbiter's operating environment
is totally different from that of airliners, and the program must
closely track the effects of the Orbiters' age and
use. 19

Records

Throughout the Commission's review of the
accident, a large number of errors were noted in the paperwork for
the Space Shuttle Main Engine/Main Propulsion System and for the
Orbiter. The review showed, however, that in the vast majority of
cases the problem lay in the documentation itself and not in the work
that was actually accomplished. The review led the Commission to
conclude that the Operations and Maintenance Instructions are in need
of an overall review and update, and the performance of Operations
and Maintenance Instructions needs to be improved.

Missed Requirements

At the time of launch, all items called for by
the Operational Maintenance Requirements and Specifications Document
were to have been met, waived or excepted. The 51-L audit review has
revealed additional areas where such requirements were not met and
were not formally waived or excepted:

1. A formal post-flight inspection
of the forward External Tank attach plate was not documented.

2. A forward avionics bay closeout panel was
not verified as installed during Orbiter rollover/stacking operations
(the area was properly configured prior to flight with installation
of a locker).

3. Flight 51-L was launched with only one of
two crew hatch microswitches showing the proper indication. This
condition was documented by a Problem Report and was deferred; no
waiver was obtained, however.

4. Post-flight hydraulic reservoir sampling
was not performed prior to connection of ground hydraulic support
equipment at Dryden Flight Research Facility, but was performed in
the Orbiter Processing Facility.

5. During Auxiliary Power Unit hypergolic
loading operations, the Number 2 tank evacuation prior to loading was
not maintained above 20 inches of mercury for five minutes as
required (19.8 inches maintained for 2 hours). This incident was
documented as an acceptable condition by Kennedy, Johnson and Launch
Support Service, but no waiver was submitted.

6. Landing gear voids were not replenished and
crew module meters were not verified during final vehicle closeouts.
The additional requirement to replenish the landing gear voids during
launch countdown was performed. 20

Inspection by Proxy

Another aspect of the processing activities
that warrants particular attention is the Shuttle Processing
Contractor's policy of using "designated [ 194 ] verifiers" to
supplement the quality assurance force. A designated verifier is a
senior technician who is authorized to inspect and approve his own
and his fellow technicians' work in specific nonflight areas, instead
of NASA quality assurance personnel inspecting the work. The aviation
industry follows this practice in performing verifications for the
Federal Aviation Administration. The Shuttle Processing Contractor
has about 770 designated verifiers (nearly 15 % of the work
force). 21 The NASA quality assurance inspection program no
longer covers 100 percent of the inspection areas. Due to reduced
manpower NASA personnel now inspect only areas that are considered
more critical. Thus the system of independent checks that NASA
maintained through several programs is declining in effectiveness.
The effect of this change requires careful evaluation by NASA.

Accidental Damage Reporting

While not specifically related to the
Challenger accident, a serious problem was identified during
interviews of technicians who work on the Orbiter. It had been their
understanding at one time that employees would not be disciplined for
accidental damage done to the Orbiter, provided the damage was fully
reported when it occurred. It was their opinion that this forgiveness
policy was no longer being followed by the Shuttle Processing
Contractor. They cited examples of employees being punished after
acknowledging they had accidentally caused damage. The technicians
said that accidental damage is not consistently reported, when it
occurs, because of lack of confidence in management's forgiveness
policy and technicians' consequent fear of losing their jobs. This
situation has obvious severe implications if left uncorrected.

Launch Pad 39B

All launch damage and launch measurement data
from Pad B ground systems anomalies were considered to be normal or
minor with three exceptions: the loss of the springs and plungers on
the booster hold-down posts; the failure of the gaseous hydrogen vent
arm to latch; and the loss of bricks from the flame trench. These
three items are treated in Appendix I, the NASA Pre-Launch Activities
Team Report (May, 1986). None contributed to the accident.

Loss of bricks from the flame trench was also
experienced during the launch of STS-1 (April, 1981) and STS-2
(November, 1981) from Pad A, though at locations closer to the
centerline of the vehicle. Since the brick was blown out of the flame
trench and away from the vehicle, there is no evidence to indicate
that the loose brick might have endangered the 51-L vehicle, but it
may be possible for damage to occur if the condition remains
uncorrected. The Pad B fire brick is to be replaced by refractory
concrete, as was done on Pad A.

Involvement of Development Contractors

The Space Shuttle program, like its
predecessors Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, Skylab and Apollo-Soyuz, is
clearly a developmental program and must be treated as such by NASA.
Indeed, the chief differences between the Shuttle and previous
developmental programs are that the Shuttle is principally a
transportation system and employs reusable hardware. Reusability
implies a new set of functions such as logistics support,
maintenance, refurbishment, lifetime concerns and structural
inspections that must be addressed by the program.

In order to enhance post-flight "turnaround"
schedule and efficiency, NASA is striving to implement processing
procedures accepted by the transportation industry. While this effort
is useful, there is not an exact industry analogy to the Orbiter
vehicles' flight operations, because each successive Shuttle mission
expands system and performance requirements. Consequently, the
Shuttle configuration is evolving as design changes and improvements
are incorporated. The demands of individual payloads can cause
significant additional developmental changes.

These developmental aspects make significant
demands, which can be met only by the following strategies:

1. Maintain a significant
engineering design and development capability among the Shuttle
contractors and an ongoing engineering capability within NASA.

2. Maintain an active analytical capability so
that the evolving capabilities of the [ 195 ] Shuttle can be
matched to the demands on the Shuttle.

The Shuttle's developmental status demands
that both NASA and all its contractors maintain a high level of
in-house experience and technical ability.

All Shuttle contractors and their
corresponding NASA project organizations expressed concern about the
organization of contractor services. When Shuttle operations were
begun, the prime development contractors had total responsibility for
all Shuttle activities. The concept of a single Shuttle Processing
Prime Contractor was adopted as NASA policy in 1981, and implemented
in 1983 when a team led by Lockheed Space Operations was selected.
The Lockheed team includes Lockheed Missiles & Space Company,
responsible for processing the Orbiter; Grumman Aerospace
Corporation, responsible for operation and maintenance of the launch
processing system; Pan American World Airways, charged with
introducing and maintaining airline methods and techniques in the
processing system; Morton Thiokol, Inc., responsible for processing
the Solid Rocket Boosters and External Tank; and Rocketdyne,
responsible for processing the Shuttle main engines.

Lockheed's performance as Shuttle Processing
Contractor is judged on the basis of a NASA grading system using
agreed criteria. In September, 1984, the company was marked down for
failure to form a coordinated contractor team. As a result of that
grading, Lockheed earned for that period an award fee of about
one-quarter of one percent of cost, on a maximum fee scale at that
time of one percent of cost. Lockheed reviewed the findings of NASA's
grading and did not quarrel with its major thrust.

The award fee presently is a composite of
incentives to be earned on mission success and cost control. It can
vary along a scale of one to 14 percent of cost. The Shuttle
Processing Contractor was earning, at the time of the Challenger
accident, about six percent of cost, or nearly midpoint on the
scale.

Although the performance of' the Shuttle
Processing Contractor's team has improved considerably, serious
processing problems have occurred, especially with respect to the
Orbiter. An example is provided by the handling of the critical
17-inch disconnect valves during the 51-L flight preparations.

During External Tank propellant loading in
preparation for launch, the liquid hydrogen 17-inch disconnect valve
was opened prior to reducing the pressure in the Orbiter liquid
hydrogen manifold, through a procedural error by the console
operator. The valve was opened with a six pounds per square inch
differential. This was contrary to the critical requirement that the
differential be no greater than one pound per square inch. This
pressure held the valve closed for approximately 18 seconds before-
it finally slammed open abruptly. These valves are extremely critical
and have very stringent tolerances to preclude inadvertent closure of
the valve during mainstage thrusting. Accidental closing of' a
disconnect valve would mean catastrophic loss of' Orbiter and crew.
The slamming of this valve (which could have damaged it) was not
reported by the operator and was not discovered until the
post-accident data review. Although this incident did not contribute
to the 51-L incident, this type of error cannot be tolerated in
future operations, and a policy of rigorous reporting of anomalies in
processing must be strictly enforced.

During the pre-launch processing and
postflight refurbishment of the Orbiter, Rockwell- the development
contractor-acts largely as an adviser to the Shuttle Processing
Contractor. Martin Marietta has a similar role regarding the
pre-launch processing of the External Tank. In contrast, NASA
directed the Shuttle Processing Contractor to subcontract with
Rocketdyne and Thiokol for the processing and refurbishment of the
main engines and the Solid Rocket Motors, respectively. If Rockwell
and Martin Marietta, as the development contractor, had a similar
direct involvement with their elements of the Shuttle system, the
likelihood of difficulties caused by improper processing would
probably be decreased. Furthermore, all Shuttle elements would
benefit from the advantages of beginning-to-end responsibility vested
in individual contractors, each responsible for the design,
development, manufacturing, operation, and refurbishment of' their
respective Shuttle elements.

[ 196 ] References

1. Letter from Gerald
D. Griffin, LO-82-90, September 9, 1982.

2. NASA Memo, April 14,
1986, PC 076109-076113.

3. Commission Hearing
Transcript, April 3, 1986, pages 2439-2440.

4. Commission Work
Session, Mission Planning and Operations Panel, April 14, 1986,
JSC, page 138.

5. Commission Hearing
Transcript, April 3, 1986, pages 2436-2437.

6. page 28.

7. Commission Hearing
Transcript, April 3, 1986, page 2429.

8. Visual Aid, Range
Safety Officer Statement, Commission Work Session, March 24, 1986,
JSC, PC 02267-02268.

9. Page 15.

10. Commission Hearing
Transcript, April 3, 1986, page 2474.

11. Page 41.

12. Pages 7-8.

13. Page 8.

14. Commission Hearing
Transcript, April 3, 1986, page 2254.

15. Commission Hearing
Transcript, April 3, 1986, page 2255.

16. Commission Hearing
Transcript, April 13, 1986, page 2485.

17. Rocketdyne Report,
BC 86-38, President Comments on the Space Shuttle Challenger
Accident Development and Production Panel, April 2, 1986, pages
170, 171, 260-268.

18. Rocketdyne Report,
BC 86-38, pages 315-324.

19. NASA Pre-Launch
Activities Team Report, Appendix D, page 188.

20. NASA Pre-Launch
Activities Team Report, Appendix D, page 186.

21. Commission Work
Session, Pre-Launch, March 4, 1986, page 206.

