

v1ch1

Report of the PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION
on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident

Chapter I: Introduction

[ 2 ] The Space Shuttle
concept had its genesis in the 1960s, when the Apollo lunar landing
spacecraft was in full development but had not yet flown. From the
earliest days of the space program, it seemed logical that the goal
of frequent, economical access to space might best be served by a
reusable launch system. In February, 1967, the President's Science
Advisory Committee lent weight to the idea of a reusable spacecraft
by recommending that studies be made "of more economical ferrying
systems, presumably involving partial or total recovery and
use."

In September, 1969, two months after the
initial lunar landing, a Space Task Group chaired by the Vice
President offered a choice of three long-range plans:

A $8-$10 billion per year program
involving a manned Mars expedition, a space station in lunar orbit
and a 50-person Earth-orbiting station serviced by a reusable
ferry, or Space Shuttle.

An intermediate program, costing less than
$8 billion annually, that would include the Mars mission.

A relatively modest $4-$5.7 billion a year
program that would embrace an Earth-orbiting space station and the
Space Shuttle as its link to Earth. 1

In March, 197O, President Nixon made it clear
that, while he favored a continuing active space program, funding on
the order of Apollo was not in the cards. He opted for the
shuttle-tended space base as a long-range goal but deferred going
ahead with the space station pending development of the shuttle
vehicle. Thus the reusable Space Shuttle, earlier considered only the
transport element of a broad, multi-objective space plan, became the
focus of NASA's near-term future.

The Space Shuttle Design

The embryo Shuttle program faced a number of
evolutionary design changes before it would become a system in being.
The first design was based on a "fly back" concept in which two
stages, each manned, would fly back to a horizontal, airplane-like
landing. The first stage was a huge, winged, rocket-powered vehicle
that would carry the smaller second stage piggyback; the carrier
would provide the thrust for liftoff and flight through the
atmosphere, then release its passenger-the orbiting vehicle-and
return to Earth. The Orbiter, containing the crew and payload, would
continue into space under its own rocket power, complete its mission
and then fly back to Earth.

The second-stage craft, conceived prior to
1970 as a space station ferry, was a vehicle considerably larger than
the later Space Shuttle Orbiter. It carried its rocket propellants
internally, had a flight deck sufficiently large to seat 12 space
station-bound passengers and a cargo bay big enough to accommodate
space station modules. The Orbiter's size put enormous weight-lifting
and thrust-generating demands on the first-stage design.

This two-stage, fully reusable design
represented the optimum Space Shuttle in terms of «routine,
economical access to space," the catchphrase that was becoming the
primary guideline for development of Earth-to-orbit systems. It was,
[ 3 ]
however, less than optimum in terms of the development investment
required: an estimated $10-13 billion, a figure that met with
disfavor in both Congress and the Office of Management and
Budget.

In 1971, NASA went back to the drawing board,
aware that development cost rather than system capability would
probably be the determining factor in getting a green light for
Shuttle development. Government and industry studies sought
developmental economies in the configuration. One proposal found
acceptance: eliminate the Orbiter's internal tanks and carry the
propellant in a single, disposable External Tank. It provided a
smaller r, cheaper Orbiter r without substantial performance
loss.

For the launch system, NASA examined a number
of possibilities. One was a winged but unmanned recoverable
liquid-fuel vehicle based on the eminently successful Saturn 5 rocket
from the Apollo Program. Other plans envisioned simpler but also
recoverable liquid-fuel systems, expendable solid rockets and the
reusable Solid Rocket Booster. NASA had been using solid-fuel
vehicles for launching some small unmanned spacecraft, but solids as
boosters for manned flight was a technology new to the agency.
Mercury, Gemini and Apollo astronauts had all been rocketed into
space by liquid-fuel systems. Nonetheless, the recoverable Solid
Rocket Booster won the nod, even though the liquid rocket offered
potentially lower operating costs.

Artist's drawing depicts Space Shuttle
stacked for launch in view from dorsal side of Orbiter (left) and
from the left side of the stack.

[ 4 ] The overriding reason
was that pricing estimates indicated a lower cost of development for
the solid booster.

Emerging from this round of design decision
making was the Space Shuttle: a three-element system composed of the
Orbiter, an expendable external fuel tank carrying liquid propellants
for the Orbiter's engines, and two recoverable Solid Rocket Boosters.
It would cost, NASA estimated early in 1972, $6.2 billion to develop
and test a five-Orbiter Space Shuttle system, about half what the
two-stage "fly back" design would have cost. To achieve that
reduction, NASA had to accept somewhat higher system operating costs
and sacrifice full reusability. The compromise design retained
recoverability and reuse of two of the three elements and still
promised to trim substantially the cost of delivering payloads to
orbit.

The final configuration was selected in March,
1972.

The Space Shuttle Development

In August, 1972, NASA awarded a contract to
Rockwell International Corporation's Space Transportation Systems
Division for design and development of the Space Shuttle Orbiter.
Martin Marietta Denver Aerospace was assigned development and
fabrication of the External Tank, Morton Thiokol Corporation was
awarded the contract for the Solid Rocket Boosters, and Rocketdyne, a
division of Rockwell, was selected to develop the Orbiter main
engines.

NASA divided managerial responsibility for the
program among three of its field centers. Johnson Space Center,
Houston, Texas, was assigned management of the Orbiter. Marshall
Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was made responsible for
the Orbiter's main engines, the External Tank and the Solid Rocket
Boosters. Kennedy Space Center, Merritt Island, Florida, was given
the job of assembling the Space Shuttle components, checking them out
and conducting launches. Because these three centers will be
mentioned repeatedly in this report, they will hereafter be
identified simply as Johnson, Marshall and Kennedy.

It was in an increasingly austere fiscal
environment that NASA struggled through the Shuttle development years
of the 1970s. The planned five-Orbiter fleet was reduced to four.
Budgetary difficulties were compounded by engineering problems and,
inevitably in a major new system whose development pushes the
frontiers of technology, there was cost growth. This combination of
factors induced schedule slippage. The initial orbital test flights
were delayed by more than two years.

The first Shuttle test flights were conducted
at Dryden Flight Research Facility, California, in 1977. The test
craft was the Orbiter Enterprise, a full-size vehicle that lacked
engines and other systems needed for orbital flight. The purpose of
these tests was to check out the aerodynamic and flight control
characteristics of the Orbiter in atmospheric flight. Mounted
piggyback atop a modified Boeing 747, the Enterprise was carried to
altitude and released for a gliding approach and landing at the
Mojave Desert test center. Five such flights were made. They served
to validate the Orbiter's computers and other systems. They also
demonstrated the craft's subsonic handling qualities, in particular
its performance in the precise unpowered landings that would be
required on all Shuttle flights.

The Enterprise test flights were followed-in
1977-80-by extensive ground tests of Shuttle systems, including
vibration tests of the entire assembly-Orbiter, External Tank and
Solid Rocket Boosters-at Marshall. Main engine test firings were
conducted at National Space Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis,
Mississippi, and on the launch pad at Kennedy.

By early 1981, the Space Shuttle was ready for
an orbital flight test program. This was carefully crafted to include
more than 1,000 tests and data collection procedures. All flights
were to be launched from Kennedy and terminate at Edwards Air Force
Base, where the Dryden Flight Research Facility is located (actually
the third flight landed at White Sands Test Facility, New Mexico,
because the normally dry lakebed at Edwards was flooded). Originally
intended as a six-mission program, the orbital test series was
reduced to four flights:

STS-1 (Space Transportation System-1),
April 12-14, 1981, Orbiter Columbia, was a two-day demonstration
of the Orbiter's ability to go into orbit and return safely. Its
[ 5 ]
main payload was a flight instrumentation pallet containing
equipment for recording temperatures, pressures and acceleration
levels at various points around the Orbiter. In addition, there
were checkouts of the cargo bay doors, attitude control system and
orbital maneuvering system.

STS-2, November 12-14, 1981, Orbiter
Columbia, marked the first test of the Remote Manipulator System
and carried a payload of Earth survey instruments. This was the
first time any spacecraft had flown twice. Failure of a fuel cell
shortened the flight by about three days.

STS-3, March 22-3O, 1982, Orbiter
Columbia, was the longest of the initial test series, staying
aloft eight days. Activities included a special test of the
manipulator in which the robot arm removed a package of
instruments from the payload bay but did not release it into
space. The flight included experiments in materials
processing.

STS-4, June 27-July 4, 1982, Orbiter
Columbia, featured another test of the robot arm, which extended a
scientific payload over the side of the payload bay, then
reberthed it. Materials processing experiments were conducted, as
were a number of scientific investigations. This flight carried
the first Department of Defense payload.

With the landing of STS-4, the orbital flight
test program came to an end with 95 percent of its objectives
accomplished. The interval between flights had been trimmed from
seven months to four, then three. NASA declared the Space Shuttle
"operational," a term that has encountered some criticism because it
erroneously suggests that the Shuttle had attained an airline-like
degree of routine operation. In any event, NASA regarded all flights
after STS-4 operational in the sense that payload requirements would
take precedence over spacecraft testing, requiring larger
crews.

After completing the orbital test in mid-
1982, NASA began the "operational phase" of the Space Shuttle
program, beginning with STS-5. The STS -for Space Transportation
System- sequential numbering was still in effect at that time; after
STS-9 NASA changed the method of numbering missions. Thereafter each
flight was designated by two numbers and a letter, such as 41-B. The
first digit indicates the fiscal year of the scheduled launch (4 for
1984). The second digit identifies the launch site (1 is Kennedy, 2
Vandenberg Air Force Base, California). The letter corresponds to the
alphabetical sequence for the fiscal year, B being the second mission
scheduled. Here is a brief summary of the 21 missions launched from
late 1982 to January, 1986:

STS-5, November 11-16, 1982, Orbiter
Columbia, launched two communications satellites, which later were
boosted to geosynchronous orbit by attached propulsion
systems.

STS-6, April 4-9, 1983, Orbiter
Challenger, was highlighted by the first Shuttle-based spacewalk,
or extravehicular activity. The crew successfully deployed the
5,000-pound Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, first of three
planned NASA communications satellites.

STS-7, June 18-24, 1983, Orbiter
Challenger, delivered a second pair of commercial communications
satellites. The mission also included additional payload release
and recapture tests using the Remote Manipulator System. This
flight marked the first retrieval of an object from orbit.

STS-8, August 30-September 6, 1983,
Orbiter Challenger, included more robot arm tests plus deployment
of a commercial/public service communications satellite. STS-9,
November 28-December 8, 1983, Orbiter Columbia, carried the first
Spacelab in the payload bay. The mission marked Columbia's return
to service after a year's hiatus, during which it had been
extensively modified.

Flight 10 (41-B), February 3-11, 1984,
Orbiter Challenger, was highlighted by the introduction of the
Manned Maneuvering Unit, a backpack propulsion unit that allows
astronauts to maneuver in space independent of the Orbiter. The
mission also launched two communications satellites, but their
boosters failed to put them into geosynchronous orbit. For the
first time, the Shuttle landed on the concrete runway at Kennedy
Space Center.

Flight 11 (41-C), April 6-13, 1984,
Orbiter Challenger, featured an important demonstration of Shuttle
ability: the retrieval, repair and redeployment of the
malfunctioning Solar Maximum Mission spacecraft with the help of a
Manned [ 6 ] Maneuvering Unit. Other activity included
deployment of the Long Duration Exposure Facility, a large
cylinder containing materials samples to be retrieved and examined
after long exposure to the space environment.

Flight 12 (41-D), August 30-September 5,
1984, Orbiter Discovery, was devoted primarily to launch of three
communications satellites. The mission demonstrated repeated
deployment and retraction of a large, foldable solar array to
investigate the practicability of using such solar wings as power
sources for extended Shuttle missions, space platforms or the
space station.

Flight 13 (41 -G), October 5- 13, 1984,
Orbiter Challenger, launched the NASA Earth Radiation Budget
Explorer. A cargo bay pallet carried instruments for Earth
observations, including an advanced imaging radar.

Flight 14 (51-A), November 8-16, 1984,
Orbiter Discovery, launched two communications satellites and
retrieved two others that had been sent into unusable orbits after
deployment on Flight 10.

Flight 15 (51-C),January 24-27, 1985,
Orbiter Discovery, carried a Department of Defense payload.

Flight 16 (51-D), April 12-19, 1985,
Orbiter Discovery, deployed two commercial satellites; one,
Leasat-3, remained in low orbit when the upper stage booster
failed to activate.

Flight 17 (51-B), April 29-May 6, 1985,
Orbiter Challenger, carried a second Spacelab mission and
materials processing experiments.

Flight 18 (51 -G), June 17 -24, 1985,
Orbiter Discovery, delivered three communications satellites,
deployed a low-cost Spartan scientific satellite and retrieved it
after a period of free flight.

Flight 19 (51-F), July 29-August 6, 1985,
Orbiter Challenger, carried the third Spacelab mission, which
covered a broad range of experiments in plasma physics,
astrophysics, solar astronomy and materials processing.

Flight 20 (51-I), August 27-September 3,
1985, Orbiter Discovery, deployed three communications satellites.
The Leasat-3 satellite which failed to activate after deployment
on Flight 16 was retrieved, repaired and successfully
redeployed.

Flight 21 (51-J), October 3-1O, 1985,
Orbiter Atlantis was devoted to another Department of Defense
mission.

Flight 22 (61-A), October 30-November 6,
1985, Orbiter Challenger, carried the fourth Spacelab mission,
devoted to materials processing experimentation.

Flight 23 (61-B), November 26-December 3,
1985, Orbiter Atlantis, was highlighted by an experiment in
astronaut assembly of structures in orbit and attendant study of
extravehicular dynamics and human factors. The mission also
deployed three communications satellites.

Flight 24 (61-C), January 12-18, 1986,
Orbiter Columbia, launched a commercial communications satellite,
deployed a Hitchhiker secondary payload, conducted experiments in
infrared imaging, acquired photos and spectral images of Comet
Halley.

Flight 25 (51-L), January 28, 1986,
Orbiter Challenger. The accident.

Including the initial orbital tests, the Space
Shuttle flew 24 successful missions over a 57-month period. Columbia
made seven trips into space, Discovery six and Atlantis two.
Challenger flew most frequently-nine times prior to its fateful last
flight.

In those 24 flights, the Shuttle demonstrated
its ability to deliver a wide variety of payloads; its ability to
serve as an orbital laboratory; its utility as a platform for
erection of large structures; and its use for retrieval and repair of
orbiting satellites.

Elements of the Space Shuttle

The Space Shuttle is the principal component
of a national Space Transportation System designed to accommodate not
only NASA's predictable needs but also those of the Department of
Defense and commercial payload sponsors. Technically speaking,
transportation system hardware embraces not only the Shuttle but its
Spacelab laboratory component, the upper stage propulsion units,
contemplated heavy lift vehicles [ 7 ] and space tugs for
moving payloads from one orbit to another. To provide for the
broadest possible spectrum of civil/military missions, the Space
Shuttle was designed to deliver 65,000 pounds of payload to an
easterly low Earth orbit or 32,000 pounds to polar orbit. The
following sections describe the main elements of the Shuttle
system.

The Orbiter

The Orbiter is as large as a mid-size airline
transport and has a structure like that of an aircraft: an aluminum
alloy skin stiffened with stringers to form a shell over frames and
bulkheads of aluminum or aluminum alloy. The major structural
sections of the Orbiter are the forward fuselage, which encompasses
the pressurized crew compartment; the mid fuselage, which contains
the payload bay; the payload bay doors; the aft fuselage, from which
the main engine nozzles project; and the vertical tail, which splits
open along the trailing edge to provide a speed brake used during
entry and landing.

The crew compartment is divided into two
levels-the flight deck on top and the middeck below. Besides working
space, the crew compartment contains the systems needed to provide a
habitable environment (atmosphere, temperature, food, water, the crew
sleep facilities and waste management). It also houses the
electronic, guidance and navigation systems.

The Orbiter crew may include as many as eight
people, although generally the limit is seven. The crew consists of
the commander, the captain of the ship; the pilot, second in command;
and two or more mission specialists. One or more payload specialists
can also be accommodated. A mission specialist coordinates activities
of the Orbiter and crew in support of a given payload objective. A
payload specialist may manage specific experiments. The commander,
pilot and mission specialists are career astronauts assigned to the
mission by NASA. Payload specialists do not come from the Astronaut
Office. They are assigned, by payload sponsors in coordination with
NASA.

Cargoes up to 24 tons have been carried in the
payload bay. Clamshell doors on the top of the Orbiter meet along the
craft's spine to enclose the bay, which is 15 feet wide and 60 feet
long.

The payload bay is designed to hold securely a
wide range of objects. They may include one or more communications
satellites to be launched from orbit, an autonomous Spacelab for
experiments in space, or cargo disposed on special pallets. To handle
cargo in orbital flight, the payload bay has the 50-foot mechanical
arm that is controlled from within the crew compartment. A television
camera and lights mounted near the end of the arm enable the operator
to see what the "hand" is doing.

Just as important as delivering cargo to orbit
is recovering a satellite and bringing it back to Earth-retrieving a
satellite in need of refurbishment, for example. The Orbiter can
carry 16 tons of cargo back from space.

The feasibility of a reusable Space Shuttle
hinges on a particularly vital requirement: protecting the Orbiter
from the searing heat generated by friction with the atmosphere when
the craft returns to Earth. Temperatures during entry may rise as
high as 2,750 degrees Fahrenheit on the leading edge of the wing and
600 degrees on the upper fuselage, the "coolest" area. The thermal
protection system devised for the Orbiter must prevent the
temperature of the aluminum skin from rising above 350 degrees during
either ascent or entry.

The Orbiter has four kinds of external
insulation that are applied to various parts of the structure
according to the temperature each is likely to experience. The
craft's nose cap and the leading edges of the wings are protected
with an all-carbon composite consisting of layers of graphite cloth
in a carbon matrix. The outer layers are converted chemically to
silicon carbide, the same material that has long been used as an
abrasive in grindstones. Areas subjected to the next greatest heat
are shielded with high-temperature ceramic tiles about six inches
square and varying in thickness from one to five inches, depending on
the protection needed. So-called "low temperature" tiles are of the
same material- nearly pure glass, of which 90 percent of the volume
is "air"-for use on areas requiring less protection. (Low-temperature
is relative; tiles so designated can withstand a temperature of 1,200
degrees Fahrenheit.) About 3O,000 tiles, each different, are
installed on each Orbiter.

Space Shuttle Main Engines

The three high-performance rocket engines in
the aft section of the Orbiter fire for about the first 8 1/2 minutes
of flight after liftoff. At sea level, each engine generates 375,000
pounds of thrust at 100 percent throttle.

The propellants for the engines are the fuel
[ 8 ]
(liquid hydrogen) and the oxidizer (liquid oxygen) carried in the
External Tank. Combustion takes place in two stages. First, the
propellants are mixed and partly burned in pre-burners. Hot gases
from the pre-burners drive the high-pressure turbopumps which deliver
propellants to the main injector. Combustion, once initiated by
electrical igniters, is self-sustaining. Before firing, the very cold
liquid propellant is allowed to flow into the system as far as the
pre-burners and combustion chamber to cool the pumps and ducts so
that the hydrogen and oxygen in the system will remain liquid when
the engine is started.

The main engines have been throttled over a
range of 65 to 104 percent of the thrust at sea level. At liftoff,
they are thrusting at 100 percent. Computers command engine thrust to
104 percent as soon as the Shuttle clears the tower. They throttle to
65 percent to reduce the maximum aerodynamic loads that occur at an
altitude of about 34,000 feet. Thereafter, the thrust is again
increased to provide an acceleration of three times that of gravity
in the last minute or so of powered flight.

External Tank

The External Tank carries the propellants for
the Orbiter's main engines-143,000 gallons of liquid oxygen and
383,000 gallons of liquid hydrogen, which is much lighter than a
comparable volume of oxygen. Together, the propellants weigh a little
more than 790 tons. Martin Marietta Denver Aerospace, Michoud,
Louisiana, builds the tank, a welded aluminum alloy cylinder with an
ogive nose and a hemispherical tail. It is 154 feet long and 27 1/2
feet in diameter.

Because the Orbiter and the two Solid Rocket
Boosters are attached to it at liftoff, the External Tank absorbs the
thrust of the combined propulsion system. It withstands complex load
effects and pressures from the propellants.

The liquid oxygen tank forms the nose of the
External Tank. It contains oxidizer kept liquid at a temperature of -
297 degrees Fahrenheit. A removable conical nose cap acts as an
aerodynamic fairing. Inside the tank, baffles reduce sloshing and the
associated control problems. The liquid hydrogen tank does not need
baffles because the fuel is so light that sloshing does not induce
significant forces. The liquid hydrogen tank accounts for the greater
part of the External Tank. Its contents are even colder than the LOX:
- 423 degrees Fahrenheit.

The intertank structure or "intertank"
connects the two propellant tanks. It is a cylindrical structural
section that houses instruments and receives and distributes most of
the thrust load from the Solid Rocket Boosters. The front end of each
booster is connected to the External Tank at the intertank
midsection.

A multi-layered thermal coating covers the
outside of the External Tank to protect it from extreme temperature
variations during pre-launch, launch, and the first 8 1/2 minutes of
flight. That insulation reduces the boil-off rate of the propellants,
which must be kept at very low temperatures to remain liquid. It also
is meant to minimize ice that might form from condensation on the
outside of the propellant tanks.

In addition to the Solid Rocket Booster
forward attachment points on either side of the intertank, three
other attachment points link each booster to the aft major ring frame
of the External Tank. The boosters are thus connected to the tank at
four points, one forward and three aft.

Three structural elements link the Orbiter to
the External Tank. A "wishbone" attachment beneath the crew
compartment connects the forward end of the Orbiter to the tank. The
two aft connections are tripods at the base of the External
Tank.

A command from the Orbiter computer jettisons
the External Tank 18 seconds after main engine cutoff, about 8 /2
minutes after liftoff. To ensure that it will travel a predictable
path, a tumble system rotates the tank end-over-end at a minimum rate
of two revolutions per minute. The tank breaks up upon atmospheric
entry, falling into the planned area of the Indian or Pacific Ocean
about an hour after liftoff. The External Tank is the only main
component of the Space Shuttle that is not recovered and
reused.

Solid Rocket Boosters

The two solid-propellant rocket boosters are
almost as long as the External Tank and attached to each side of it.
They contribute about 80 percent of the total thrust at liftoff; the
rest comes from the Orbiter's three main engines. Roughly two minutes
after liftoff and 24 miles down range, the solid rockets have
exhausted their fuel. Explosives separate the boosters from the
External Tank. Small rocket motors move them away from the External
Tank and the Orbiter, which continue toward orbit under thrust of the
Shuttle's main engines.

[ 9 ] The Solid Rocket
Booster is made up of several subassemblies: the nose cone, Solid
Rocket Motor and the nozzle assembly. Marshall is responsible for the
Solid Rocket Booster; Morton Thiokol, Inc., Wasatch Division, Brigham
City, Utah, is the contractor for the Solid Rocket Motors. Each Solid
Rocket Motor case is made of 11 individual cylindrical weld free
steel sections about 12 feet in diameter. When assembled, they form a
tube almost 116 feet long. The 11 sections are the forward dome
section, six cylindrical sections, the aft External Tank-attach ring
section, two stiffener sections, and the aft dome section.

The 11 sections of the motor case are joined
by tang-and-clevis joints held together by 177 steel pins around the
circumference of each joint.

After the sections have been machined to fine
tolerances and fitted, they are partly assembled at the factory into
four casting segments. Those four cylindrical segments are the parts
of the motor case into which the propellant is poured (or cast). They
are shipped by rail in separate pieces to Kennedy.

Joints assembled before the booster is shipped
are known as factory joints. Joints between the four casting segments
are called field joints; they are connected at Kennedy when the
booster segments are stacked for final assembly.

Orbital Maneuvering System

The two engine pods on the aft fuselage of the
Orbiter contain maneuvering engines and their propellant-monomethyl
hydrazine (the fuel) and nitrogen tetroxide (the oxidizer). Helium
pressurizes the propellant tanks, and the fuel and the oxidizer
ignite on contact.

Forty-four small rocket motors in the
Orbiter's nose and aft section maneuvering system pods allow
adjustments of the vehicle's attitude in pitch, yaw, and roll axes.
They also may be used to make small changes of velocity along one of
the Orbiter's three axes.

Flight of a Shuttle

Except for ascent and entry, all of the
Shuttle's typical seven-day mission is in orbit. That is where the
goals of a given mission are accomplished: scientific experiments
carried out; satellites deployed into orbit, retrieved or repaired;
observations made of the Earth and the solar system. The Shuttle
makes one revolution of the Earth approximately every 90 minutes
during the satellite mission.

When it comes out of orbit, the Shuttle is
moving at about 17, 500 miles an hour. Reaction engines position the
Orbiter nose forward again for entry into the atmosphere. Those
thrusters continue to control the Orbiter's attitude until the
atmosphere becomes dense enough for the aerodynamic surfaces to take
effect.

The Shuttle enters the ever-thickening blanket
of atmosphere at 400,000 feet of altitude and a speed of more than
17,000 miles an hour (about Mach 25). The Orbiter's nose is
positioned 40 degrees above its flight path. That attitude increases
aerodynamic drag, thus helping to dissipate the tremendous amount of
energy that the spacecraft has when it enters the atmosphere.
Friction heats the surface of the Orbiter, which is protected by
thermal tiles, and ionizes the surrounding air, preventing radio
communication with Earth for the next 13 minutes.

The flight control system's computer program
allows use of the reaction thrusters and aerodynamic surfaces in
combination to control the spacecraft. At Mach 4.2, the rudder is
activated, and the last reaction thrusters are deactivated at Mach 1.
Thereafter, the craft is entirely maneuvered like an airplane by
movement of the aerodynamic control surfaces: elevons, rudder, speed
brake, and body flap.

In the landing approach, the Orbiter has no
propulsion. It has only its velocity and altitude. Its energy must be
carefully managed to maneuver the Shuttle aerodynamically to a safe
landing. Beginning this terminal phase, the glide slope is steep-19
degrees-as the Orbiter descends toward the runway. Half a minute
before touchdown and two miles from the runway, the craft flares to a
shallow, almost flat 1.5 degree glide slope. Touchdown occurs at 225
miles per hour. On the runway, the Orbiter rolls to a stop, and the
mission is complete. .

References

1. Space Task Group Report
to the President, "The Post-Apollo Space Program: Directions for the
Future," September, 1969, pages 20 and 21.

