

v1pref.htm

Report of the PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION
on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident

Preface

[ 1 ] The accident of Space
Shuttle Challenger, mission 51-L, interrupting for a time one of the
most productive engineering, scientific and exploratory programs in
history, evoked a wide range of deeply felt public responses. There
was grief and sadness for the loss of seven brave members of the
crew; firm national resolve that those men and women be forever
enshrined in the annals of American heroes, and a determination,
based on that resolve and in their memory, to strengthen the Space
Shuttle program so that this tragic event will become a milestone on
the way to achieving the full potential that space offers to
mankind.

The President, who was moved and troubled by
this accident in a very personal way, appointed an independent
Commission made up of persons not connected with the mission to
investigate it. The mandate of the Commission was to:

1. Review the circumstances
surrounding the accident to establish the probable cause or causes of
the accident; and

2. Develop recommendations for corrective or
other action based upon the Commission's findings and
determinations.

Immediately after being appointed, the
Commission moved forward with its investigation and, with the full
support of the White House, held public hearings dealing with the
facts leading up to the accident. In a closed society other options
are available; in an open society-unless classified matters are
involved-other options are not, either as matter of law or as a
practical matter.

In this case a vigorous investigation and full
disclosure of the facts were necessary. The way to deal with a
failure of this magnitude is to disclose all the facts fully and
openly; to take immediate steps to correct mistakes that led to the
failure; and to continue the program with renewed confidence and
determination.

The Commission construed its mandate somewhat
broadly to include recommendations on safety matters not necessarily
involved in this accident but which require attention to make future
flights safer. Careful attention was given to concerns expressed by
astronauts because the Space Shuttle program will only succeed if the
highly qualified men and women who fly the Shuttle have confidence in
the system.

However, the Commission did not construe its
mandate to require a detailed investigation of all aspects of the
Space Shuttle program; to review budgetary matters; or to interfere
with or supersede Congress in any way in the performance of its
duties. Rather, the Commission focused its attention on the safety
aspects of future flights based on the lessons learned from the
investigation with the objective being to return to safe
flight.

Congress recognized the desirability, in the
first instance, of having a single investigation of this national
tragedy. It very responsibly agreed to await the Commission's
findings before deciding what further action might be necessary to
carry out its responsibilities.

For the first several days after the accident-
possibly because of the trauma resulting from the accident-NASA
appeared to be withholding information about the accident from the
public. After the Commission began its work, and at its suggestion,
NASA began releasing a great deal of information that helped to
reassure the public that all aspects of the accident were being
investigated and that the full story was being told in an orderly and
thorough manner.

Following the suggestion of the Commission,
NASA established several teams of persons not involved in the mission
51-L launch process to support the Commission and its panels. These
NASA teams have cooperated with the Commission in every aspect of its
work. The result has been a comprehensive and complete
investigation.

The Commission believes that its investigation
and report have been responsive to the request of the President and
hopes that they will serve the best interests of the nation in
restoring the United States space program to its preeminent position
in the world.

