

v1recomm

Report of the PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION
on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident

Recommendations

[ 198 ] The Commission has
conducted an extensive investigation of the Challenger accident to
determine the probable cause and necessary corrective actions. Based
on the findings and determinations of its investigation, the
Commission has unanimously adopted recommendations to help assure the
return to safe flight.

The Commission urges that the Administrator of
NASA submit, one year from now, a report to the President on the
progress that NASA has made in effecting the Commission's
recommendations set forth below:

- I -

Design . The
faulty Solid Rocket Motor joint and seal must be changed. This could
be a new design eliminating the joint or a redesign of the current
joint and seal. No design options should be prematurely precluded
because of schedule, cost or reliance on existing hardware. All Solid
Rocket Motor joints should satisfy the following requirements:

The joints should be fully understood,
tested and verified.

The integrity of the structure and of the
seals of all joints should be not less than that of the case walls
throughout the design envelope.

The integrity of the joints should be
insensitive to:

Dimensional tolerances.

Transportation and handling.

Assembly procedures.

Inspection and test procedures.

Environmental effects.

Internal case operating
pressure.

Recovery and reuse effects.

Flight and water impact loads.

The certification of the new design should
include:

Tests which duplicate the actual launch
configuration as closely as possible.

Tests over the full range of operating
conditions, including temperature.

Full consideration should be given to
conducting static firings of the exact flight configuration in a
vertical attitude.

Independent Oversight . The Administrator of NASA should request the National
Research Council to form an independent Solid Rocket Motor design
oversight committee to implement the Commission's design
recommendations and oversee the design effort. This committee
should:

Review and evaluate certification
requirements.

Provide technical oversight of the design,
test program and certification.

Report to the Administrator of NASA on the
adequacy of the design and make appropriate
recommendations.

- II -

[ 199 ] Shuttle Management Structure . The Shuttle Program Structure should be reviewed. The
project managers for the various elements of the Shuttle program felt
more accountable to their center management than to the Shuttle
program organization. Shuttle element funding, work package
definition, and vital program information frequently bypass the
National STS (Shuttle) Program Manager.

A redefinition of the Program Manager's
responsibility is essential. This redefinition should give the
Program Manager the requisite authority for all ongoing STS
operations. Program funding and all Shuttle Program work at the
centers should be placed clearly under the Program Manager's
authority.

Astronauts in Management . The Commission observes that there appears to be a
departure from the philosophy of the 1960s and 1970s relating to the
use of astronauts in management positions. These individuals brought
to their positions flight experience and a keen appreciation of
operations and flight safety.

NASA should encourage the transition of
qualified astronauts into agency management positions.

The function of the Flight Crew Operations
director should be elevated in the NASA organization
structure.

Shuttle Safety Panel . NASA should establish an STS Safety Advisory Panel
reporting to the STS Program Manager. The Charter of this panel
should include Shuttle operational issues, launch commit criteria,
flight rules, flight readiness and risk management. The panel should
include representation from the safety organization, mission
operations, and the astronaut office.

- III -

Criticality Review and Hazard
Analysis . NASA and the primary Shuttle
contractors should review all Criticality 1, 1R, 2, and 2R items and
hazard analyses. This review should identify those items that must be
improved prior to flight to ensure mission safety. An Audit Panel,
appointed by the National Research Council, should verify the
adequacy of the effort and report directly to the Administrator of
NASA.

- IV -

Safety Organization . NASA should establish an Office of Safety,
Reliability and Quality Assurance to be headed by an Associate
administrator, reporting directly to the NASA Administrator. It would
have direct authority for safety, reliability, and quality assurance
throughout the agency. The office should be assigned the work force
to ensure adequate oversight of its functions and should be
independent of other NASA functional and program
responsibilities.

The responsibilities of this office should
include:

The safety, reliability and quality
assurance functions as they relate to all NASA activities and
programs.

Direction of reporting and documentation
of problems, problem resolution and trends associated with flight
safety.

- V -

[ 200 ] Improved Communications . The Commission found that Marshall Space Flight
Center project managers, because of a tendency at Marshall to
management isolation, failed to provide full and timely information
bearing on the safety of flight 51-L to other vital elements of
Shuttle program management.

NASA should take energetic steps to
eliminate this tendency at Marshall Space Flight Center, whether
by changes of personnel, organization, indoctrination or all
three.

A policy should be developed which governs
the imposition and removal of Shuttle launch constraints.

Flight Readiness Reviews and Mission
Management Team meetings should be recorded.

The flight crew commander, or a designated
representative, should attend the Flight Readiness Review,
participate in acceptance of the vehicle for flight, and certify
that the crew is properly prepared for flight.

- VI -

Landing Safety . NASA must take actions to improve landing
safety.

The tire, brake and nosewheel steering
systems must be improved. These systems do not have sufficient
safety margin, particularly at abort landing sites.

The specific conditions under which
planned landings at Kennedy would be acceptable should be
determined. Criteria must be established for tires, brakes and
nosewheel steering. Until the systems meet those criteria in high
fidelity testing that is verified at Edwards, landing at Kennedy
should not be planned.

Committing to a specific landing site
requires that landing area weather be forecast more than an hour
in advance. During unpredictable weather periods at Kennedy,
program officials should plan on Edwards landings. Increased
landings at Edwards may necessitate a dual ferry
capability.

- VII -

Launch Abort and Crew
Escape . The Shuttle program management
considered first-stage abort options and crew escape options several
times during the history of the program, but because of limited
utility, technical infeasibility, or program cost and schedule, no
systems were implemented. The Commission recommends that NASA:

Make all efforts to provide a crew escape
system for use during controlled gliding flight.

Make every effort to increase the range of
flight conditions under which an emergency runway landing can be
successfully conducted in the event that two or three main engines
fail early in ascent.

- VIII -

[ 201 ] Flight Rate . The
nation's reliance on the Shuttle as its principal space launch
capability created a relentless pressure on NASA to increase the
flight rate. Such reliance on a single launch capability should be
avoided in the future.

NASA must establish a flight rate that is
consistent with its resources. A firm payload assignment policy
should be established. The policy should include rigorous controls on
cargo manifest changes to limit the pressures such changes exert on
schedules and crew training.

- IX -

Maintenance Safeguards . Installation, test, and maintenance procedures must
be especially rigorous for Space Shuttle items designated Criticality
1. NASA should establish a system of analyzing and reporting
performance trends of such items.

Maintenance procedures for such items should
be specified in the Critical Items List, especially for those such as
the liquid-fueled main engines, which require unstinting maintenance
and overhaul.

With regard to the Orbiters, NASA
should:

Develop and execute a comprehensive
maintenance inspection plan.

Perform periodic structural inspections
when scheduled and not permit them to be waived.

Restore and support the maintenance and
spare parts programs, and stop the practice of removing parts from
one Orbiter to supply another.

Concluding Thought

The Commission urges that NASA continue to
receive the support of the Administration and the nation. The agency
constitutes a national resource that plays a critical role in space
exploration and development. It also provides a symbol of national
pride and technological leadership.

The Commission applauds NASA's spectacular
achievements of the past and anticipates impressive achievements to
come. The findings and recommendations presented in this report are
intended to contribute to the future NASA successes that the nation
both expects and requires as the 21st century approaches.

