

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
ANL-6692 
Reactor Technology 
(TID-4500, 19th Ed.) 
AEC Research and 
Development Report 
ARGONNE NATIONAL LABORATORY 
9700 South Cass Avenue 
Argonne, Illinois 
A RETROSPECTIVE ANALYSIS OF ASPECTS 
OF THE ALPR (SL-1) DESIGN 
by 
W. J. Kann and D. H. Shaftman 
Reactor Engineering Division 
November 1962 
Operated by The University of Chicago 
under 
Contract W-31-109-eng-38 
with the 
U. S. Atomic Energy Commission 


===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
DISCLAIMER 
 
This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an 
agency of the United States Government.  Neither the United States 
Government nor any agency Thereof, nor any of their employees, 
makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal 
liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or 
usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process 
disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately 
owned rights.  Reference herein to any specific commercial product, 
process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or 
otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, 
recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or any 
agency thereof.  The views and opinions of authors expressed herein 
do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States 
Government or any agency thereof. 


===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
DISCLAIMER 
 
Portions of this document may be illegible in 
electronic image products.  Images are produced 
from the best available original document. 
 


===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
2 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
4 
I. INTRODUCTION 
5 
II. CHRONOLOGY OF DESIGN AND OPERATION 
5 
III. THE SL-1 INCIDENT 
8 
IV. DESCRIPTION OF REACTOR COMPONENTS 
10 
A. 
Fuel Assembly. 
11 
B. 
Burnable-Poison Strips 
12 
C. 
Core Shroud 
12 
D. 
Control Rods 
12 
E. 
Control Rod Drives 
l6 
F. 
Soluble-Poison System 
, 
l6 
V. BASIS OF DESIGN OF CONTROL SYSTEM 
18 
VI. REACTOR PHYSICS DATA 
19 
A. 
The Cold Fresh Reactor 
20 
B. 
The Cold Operated Reactor 
21 
VII. EVALUATION OF THE PERFORMANCE OF THE 
CONTROL SYSTEM 
22 
A. 
Burnable-Poison Strips 
22 
B. 
Sticking of Control Rods , 
24 
VIII. CRITIQUE OF THE CONTROL SYSTEM; 
GENERALIZATIONS. . 
26 
A. 
Top Mounting vs Bottom Mounting of Control Rod 
Drives 
. 
26 
B. 
Assemibly (Disassembly) of the Drive to Its Control 
Rod 
27 
C. 
Burnable Poison. 
29 
D. 
Soluble Poison 
31 
E. 
Reactor Shutdown Margin. . 
34 
F. 
The "Single-Mistake" Criterion 
35 
IX. SUMMARY AND REMARKS . 
37 
APPENDIX A: TECHNICAL CHARACTERISTICS - ARGONNE 
LOW POWER REACTOR (ALPR) 
41 
REFERENCES 
50 


===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
LIST OF FIGURES 
Title 
Page 
SL-1 Excursion Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9 
Fuel Assembly. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
11 
Core Plan, Section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
13 
Cross-Shaped Control Rod . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
14 
Sequence of Control Rod Positions during Assembly of a 
Drive to Its Control Rod . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15 
Control Rod Drive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
17 
Critical Positions of Control Rods at Room Temperature 
vs Total Energy Output (No Xenon-135) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
22 


===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
ACKNOW LEDGMENTS 
The authors wish to acknowledge the following Argonne National 
Laboratory personnel: 
Mr. E. E. Hamer, for general comments and for discussions with 
regard to the development of the ALPR design. 
Messrs. J. E. Draley and S. Greenberg, for discussions about cor 
rosion of burnable-poison strips in hot water. 
Messrs, R. A. Noland and D. E. Walker, for consultations with 
regard to the use of burnable poisons in reactors. 
Messrs. C. R. Breden and N. R. Grant, for discussions concerning 
the use of soluble poison for control of boiling water reactors. 
Messrs. R. O. Brittan, H. H. Hooker, W. C. Lipinski, G. C. Milak, 
A. Smaardyk, and B. I. Spinrad for consultations and numerous helpful 
suggestions. 


===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
5 
A RETROSPECTIVE ANALYSIS OF ASPECTS 
OF THE ALPR (SL-1)* DESIGN 
by 
W. J. Kann and D. H. Shaftman 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The Argonne Low Power Reactor (ALPR) was designed by Argonne 
National Laboratory (ANL) as a prototype of a nuclear power plant intended 
for DEW Line sites. It was constructed at the National Reactor Testing 
Station, IdahO; and was tested and operated briefly by ANL. In February, 
1959s responsibility for operation of the plant (designated SL-1) was trans-
ferred to Combustion Engineering, Inc., as operating contractor. On 
January 3, 1961, the reactor was destroyed in a nuclear incident. 
A primary purpose of this report is to examine various aspects of 
the control system of the ALPR (SL-l), in the perspective of the occurrence 
of the incident and of the investigations and discussions stimulated by the 
incident. 
Another major purpose is to present ideas, fostered by these dis-
cussions, which are relevant to the evaluation of the safety of reactor 
design and operation, and, in particular, of control system design. 
II. CHRONOLOGY OF DESIGN AND OPERATION 
P r i m a r y purposes of this report are: 
(1) to present a critique of aspects of the reactor design, in the 
retrospect of the operational history of the reactor, and the 
fact that the incident occurred; and 
(2) 
to discuss certain concepts of the philosophy of reactor 
control. 
*Throughout this report, the designation ALPR is used when reference 
is made to the Argonne Low Power Reactor as designed, tested, and 
operated by Argonne National Laboratory. 
The reactor designation 
SL-1 is used in discussions concerning the subsequent period of 
operation of the plant. 


===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
6 
The critique of the design proceeds on two levels. On the one 
hand, if the reactor had been designed for purposes of experimentation, or 
for use as a civilian power plant, the plant design would have been differ-
ent in a number of respects. However, one must keep in mind that the 
reactor was intended for certain, specific purposes which strongly in-
fluenced the reactor design. Therefore, it is useful to review here some 
of the goals of and criteria for the reactor design. ^^/ For convenience, 
the specifications for the reactor plant are set forth in Appendix A: 
"Technical Characteristics - Argonne Low Power Reactor (ALPR)." 
The ALPR was designed as the prototype for a nuclear power 
plant which would meet the needs of an Auxiliary Station, DEW Line, and 
would be compatible with arctic environmental conditions. \2j in accord-
ance with the specifications, the ALPR was constructed at the National 
Reactor Testing Station, Idaho, in an area set aside for military reactors. 
As a prototype plant, the ALPR was to contain essentially only 
those extra features which were required for the safety of the personnel 
and of the plant, e.g., extra nuclear instrumentation used in the p r e -
operational program of reactor physics experiments. In proving the 
design, it was intended that the reactor would be tested primarily for its 
capacity to meet the requirements of successful routine operation. Thus, 
it was expected that the plant would be in essentially sustained operation 
for a period of approximately three years. Training of military personnel 
was to be a part of the operation, but it was expected that the training 
would be subordinate to and coincidental with the routine operation of the 
plant. (3) 
In further accordance with the design specifications, the reactor 
was designed as a thermal, heterogeneous system, fueled with assemblies 
of clad plates containing uraniura highly enriched in U^^^, and cooled and 
moderated by the natural circulation of water within the pressure vessel 
containing the core. The normal means for controlling the reactor was a 
combination of control rods, containing natural cadmium, and a set of 
burnable-poison strips (highly enriched boron, dispersed in alurainum-
nickel) which were fusion-welded to side plates of fuel assemblies. In 
addition, the design included a backup, non-emergency control system 
based on the introduction of a solution of boric acid into the reactor water. 
(A more detailed description of plant components is given in Section IV.) 
As designed and built, the reactor core structure provided spaces 
for as many as 59 fuel assemblies, plus one neutron-source assembly. 
The reference ALPR reactor, with a nomiinal therm.al power rating of 
3 Mwt, included 40 fuel assemblies and five cross-shaped control rods. 
However, additional spaces, for four tee-shaped control rods, were avail-
able at the periphery of the full core structure. 


===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
Critical experimentation began on August 11, 1958, at which time 
a critical array, consisting of ten fuel assemblies without poison strips, 
was attained at room temperature. During the ensuing weeks, an experi-
mental program was carried out both at room temperature and at operating 
temperature (~420°F), and a final reference core was selected for use in 
the prototype plant. Details of the zero-power experimental work are 
given in Ref. 4. A chronology, both of these pre-power experiments 
(Experianents No. 1 to 122), and of the subsequent tests at power (Experi-
ments No. 123 to 210B), is supplied in Ref. 5. 
On October 23, 1958, a series of check criticals were begun at 
room temperature, and were continued to various temperatures up to the 
design operating value, 420°F. In this sequence, nuclear power (^-^ Mwt) 
was used to heat the reactor water. In continuation of this work, the 
reactor power level was raised, in steps of 1,000 lb steam/hr, to a steam 
mass flow rate of 9,150 Ib/hr, at which time (October 24, 1958) the turbine-
generator equipment was placed in operation. 
Between October 24, 1958 and November 10, 1958, power runs were 
made to determine such reactor characteristics as: 
(1) the reactivity effect of equilibrium xenon at full power; 
(2) the buildup of maximum xenon after reactor shutdown from 
full power; 
(3) 
relative positions of the five cross-shaped control rods as a 
function of the measured steam mass flow rate; 
(4) 
response of the reactor to " step-function" changes in feedwater 
flow rate, and in the jxiass flow rate of steam to the turbine; 
(5) the proper functioning of steamt safety and pressure-relief 
valves; 
(6) 
response of the reactor, when under automatic power demand 
control, to programmed changes in power demand; in these 
runs, various settings of the dead band and the travel ratio on 
the automatically operated drive for the center control rod were 
tested; 
(7) 
the proper operation of the safety devices which shut down the 
reactor when positions of high or low water level (in the vessel) 
are reached; and 
(8) the response of the reactor to "blind startup." 
Also, during this period, tests were made to investigate the r e -
sponse of the turbine-generator equipment to programmed sequences of 
step changes in load demand. 


===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
8 
Between November 19, 1958 and December 11, 1958, a 500-hr plant 
performance acceptance test was completed, with a chargeable down-time 
percentage of less than 3%. During this tim.e, the automatic power demand 
system was modified, teinporarily, to investigate the response of the re-
actor to a control system in which the position of the center control rod 
was regulated by a signal of the deviation of reactor pressure from a 
fixed value. 1^) 
The period between December 12, 1958 and February 5, 1959 was 
devoted to: 
(1) 
additional training of military personnel in the routine 
operation of the plant; 
(2) modifications of the plant to correct various deficiencies 
observed;(6} 
(3) 
additional plant performance tests (January 5, 1959 to 
January 9, 1959);(6) 
(4) 
a perraanent modification of the automatic control system, 
as described in the preceding paragraph, and power opera-
tion which verified that the new controller was satisfactory; 
and 
(5) 
a period of training of personnel of the new operating con-
tractor. Combustion Engineering, Inc. 
On February 5, 1959, Combustion Engineering, Inc. became the 
operating contractor of the SL-1. 
Details of the subsequent history of reactor operations are avail-
able in a number of reports by Combustion Engineering, Inc. (C.E.), some 
of which are listed in the References of Ref. 7. In Section VII of the 
present report, some of the problems noted by C.E. during their period 
of reactor operation are described. 
On January 3, 1961, after approximately ten days of end-of-year 
shutdown, and during the process of reassembling the drive mechanisms 
to their control rods, a nuclear incident occurred resulting in the destruc-
tion of the reactor core and the death of the three military personnel on 
duty. 
III. THE SL-1 INCIDENT 
The men on duty at the time of the incident had been assigned a 
series of tasks to perform during that shift period of eight hours. It ap-
pears that, at the moment of the incident, all three men were standing on 


===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
the top head of the pressure vessel, 
activities is as follows:(8) 
The official reconstruction of their 
"At the time of the explosion, the reactor crew was naost 
probably engaged in reassembly of the number 9 control rod (the 
central control rod) assembly. 
To the Board, it appears quite 
plausible that the shift supervisor and the other regular miember 
of the crew were located on top of the reactor vessel at the time 
of the explosion. The third member of the crew, who was a 
trainee, might have been partially over the reactor top or close to 
the edge of the reactor top. Based on medical evidence of injury, 
location of the m.en after the incident and knowledge of the individual 
capabilities and job assignments, it appears reasonable to hypoth-
esize that the supervisor was in a crouched or squatting position 
which would be normal for manipulation of the C-clamp during the 
reassembly of the number 9 control rod drive. Similarly, it would 
appear reasonable to hypothesize that the regular crew member 
was located in,a position for lifting the number 9 control rod a s -
sembly with the handling tool. 
There is no direct evidence to 
corroborate these hypothetical assertions." 
In their final report,(9) summarizing the evidence obtained during 
their 13 months of cleanup and investigation of the SL-1, the General 
Electric Co. (G.E.) group outlined a possible sequence of events, following 
a manual withdrawal of the center control rod. In this postulated sequence, 
shown in Fig. 1, a minimum reactor period of approximately 4 m s is de-
rived, corresponding to a maximum reactivity insertion of approximately 2.4%. 
t ' -500 milliseconds 
Central Control 
Rod Withdrawal 
Commences 
Portion of Plates 
Reach Vaporization 
Temperature 
Wfff'O 
t = -120 milliseconds 
Reactor Goes 
Critical with Rod 
at 16.7 Inches 
Central Rod 
at 2) Inches 
(2.4% AK) 
t ' 0.5 inilljseconds 
Prompt Nuclear Energy 
Release Ends. Total 
Nuclear Energy of 
Excursion = 130 Mw-sec 
t = 0 milliseconds 
Peak of Power 
Burst; 19,000 (V 
20% of plate area destroyed. Metal-water 
reaction increases total energy about 20-5. 
Center 16 elements and central shroud 
and control blade ejected from core. 
Water column atjowe 
core accelerated by . 
average pressure of 
5(»psi 
{ = M milliseconds 
Water slams against lid 
of vessel. Maximum 
pressure = lO.OCWpsi 
Head shielding ejected. Plugs ejected with 
velocity of 85 ft/sec or less. Vessel rises, 
shearing connecting pipes. Guide tubes 
collapse, f^ozzles §t vessel expand. 
t - 160 milliseconds 
First plug hits 
ceiling 
112-2342 
2/3 of water 
' expelled. 
About 5% of 
fission products 
expelled. 
t = SIM milliseconds 
Vessel hits 
ceiling 
Insulation 
ripped 
from 
vessel. 
t = 2000-4000 milliseconds 
Vessel comes to rest in 
support cylinder. 
Fig. 1. SL-1 Excursion Summary (Reproduced from Fig. IV-4 of Ref. 9-
Values are approximate as discussed in Ref. 9.) 


===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
Although the accuracy of some of the details included in Fig. 1 is 
open to question, there is little doubt that the incident was caused by a 
manual withdrawal of the center control rod far beyond the maximum posi-
tion specified in the instructions for assembling the drive mechanism to 
its control rod.w) 
Attempts to pinpoint the reason for a rod withdrawal apparently so 
m.uch in violation of the specified assembly procedure have been unsuc-
cessful. 
The extensive history of earlier assembly operations of this 
type, for the center control rod, offers no indication of difficulty. On the 
morning of January 3, 1961, a disassembly of the center rod from its drive 
was accomplished without difficulty. 
In their post-incident work, G. E. 
found no evidence -which might indicate that the center rod had stuck and 
that an attempt had been made to pull it loose. (On the other hand, there 
was no proof that this was not the cause of the incident.)!*Oj 
In the letter of submission of their final report, the Board of 
Investigation for the SL-1 Incident stated:U-^) 
"One or more of the following circumstances may have 
resulted in the abnormal manual withdrawal of the blade: 
Inadequate or faulty procedure or training, 
(The Board 
has no reason to change its previous conclusion that the training 
of the military personnel for this maintenance operation was 
adequate.) 'Human error,' for example, incorrect manipulation 
of the blade owing to preoccupation of the manipulator with ex-
traneous matters. Involuntary performance of the individual 
manipulating the blade as a result of unusual or unexpected 
stimulus. Deliberate malperformance motivated, for example, 
by emotional stress or instability." 
For further details of the results of the recovery operations on 
the SL-1, and of the analysis of the accident, the reader is referred to the 
G.E. final report.(9) The brief summary presented above is intended to 
set the scene for the following sections, where the reactor design is sum-
marized, some changes observed during operation are discussed, and a 
critique is made of the control system design. 
IV. DESCRIPTION OF REACTOR COMPONENTS* 
The reference 3-Mwt ALPR core, containing 40 fuel assemblies, 
was controlled by a system of five cross-shaped control rods, and full-
length and half-length burnable-poison strips attached to the side plates 
*A more detailed description of components can be found in Ref. 1. 


===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
11 
of fuel assemblies. The core shroud structure provided spaces for as many 
as 59 fuel assemblies, plus one neutron source assembly. For control of 
so large a reactor, channels for four tee-shaped control rods were avail-
able. In the reference core, dummy fuel assemblies were inserted so as 
to fill compartments and, thereby, to keep the fuel assemblies and the 
source assembly in vertical alignment. A manually operated boric acid 
system was available for slow, non-emergency shutdown. 
A. Fuel Assembly 
The reference core contained 40 fuel assemblies. Each fuel a s -
sembly (Fig. 2) contained nine fuel plates. The active portion of the fuel 
plate consisted of a center zone (0.050in.x3.50in.x25.8in. long), of an 
.050 ALUMINUM-URANIUM CORE 
.035 ALUMINUM-NICKEL CLAD 
SECTION A-A 
050 
®3.610 SO 
112-2347 
^ I L 
DIHEMSIONS 
IM 
INCHES 
Fig. 2 
Fuel Assembly 


===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
alloy of uranium, aluminum, and nickel. The uranium was enriched to 
~93 wt-% U^'^; the nickel constituted ~1.6 wt-% of the fuel-plate core.(l2) 
The fuel-plate core was clad on both faces with a 0.035-in. thickness of 
aluminum-nickel alloy, X8001. 
B. Burnable-Poison Strips 
Thin burnable-poison strips were fusion-welded to one or both 
side plates of the fuel assembly. The strips, extruded from a miixture of 
aluminum-nickel and boron highly enriched (>90%) in B^" (boron-10), 
assisted in the control of the excess reactivity of the core. In the refer-
ence core, one full-length (25.8 in.) poison strip, containing ~0.5 gm B^'', 
was welded to a side plate of each fuel assembly. One half-length (12.9 in.) 
strip, containing ~0.2 gra B^", was welded to the bottom half of the other 
side plate of each of the 16 central fuel assemblies."^) 
Burnable-poison 
strips of a simLilar type had been used successfully in BORAX-III.l•'•'*) 
C. Core Shroud 
As shown in Fig. 3, the core shroud structure divided the core 
into 16 compartments, twelve designed to accommodate four assemblies 
each and four corner compartments each capable of accommodating 
three assemblies. 
The sides of the compartments provided vertical guide channels 
for the control rods. A water-channel thickness of 0.5 in. gave an ade-
quate average clearance of approximately 0.14 in. on either side of the 
rod. The entire core shroud was fabricated from the aluminum-nickel 
alloy X8001. 
D. Control Rods 
As shown in Fig. 4, each of the five cross-shaped control rods 
consisted of a cadraium absorber section (0.060 in. x 14 in. x 34 in. long) 
clad with O.OSO-in.-thick aluminum-nickel alloy, X8001; the total rod 
thickness was 0.220 inches. The central control rod had a 17-in.-long 
follower, and the other four rods had 5~in.-long followers. A stainless 
steel ball-joint end fitting afforded a simple naeans of connecting the 
drive mechanism to the rod. 
Although the active core length was only 25.8 in., the additional 
absorber length (more than 8 in.) of the control rods gave essentially 
full coverage of the core during normal shutdown, and during the process 
of engaging the drive mechanism to, or disengaging it from, the control 
rod (Fig. 5). 


===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
TEE-SHAPED 
CONTROL ROD 
CHANNEL 
POINTER RIVET 
FOR FULL-LENGTH 
BURN ABLE-POISON 
STRIP 
CROSS-SHAPED 
CONTROL ROD 
IN CHANNEL 
CONTROL ROD SHROUD 
0 
t 
4 
® 
' • l . l . l . l . l . l 
SCALE-INCHES 
CORE SUPPORT BRACKET 
THERMAL SHIELD 
PRESSURE VESSEL 
FUEL ASSENBLY GRID 
(DOTTED) 
112-2345 
Fig. 3. Core Plan, Section 


===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
14 
,060 CADMIUM 
.080 ALUMINUM-
NICKEL 
SPOTWELD 
-.220 
.060ALUMINUM-
NICKEL 
SECTION A--A 
•WELD 
. ^ I 
CROSS 
SECTION B-B 
17 
(CENTER ROD) 
(OTHER RODS) 
ALL 
DIMENSIONS 
IN 
i NCHES 
1 1 2 - 2 3 4 4 
Fig. 4. Cross-Shaped Control Rod 


===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
15 
C CLAMP 
T i W D AT MiT ON CONTROL M D IHiSUD 
•-C^ M8 Al IHBICATED liTO 
•-- 
LOAD m SPRI«@ 
,_^ ROB AT M I 8 M FOSITISH 
(i 
FOR ^TTMHIie WASHEH, 
HUT I eOTTEK FIN 
ALL DIMENSIONS IM liCHES 
TOP OF SWING (NO LOAD) 
ttnia 
LINE OF 
PIHION SHAFT 
TOP OF PKE8SURE 
VESSEL FLANflE 
TOP OF PRESSURE VESSEL 
TOP OF SitOiB 
TOP OF ACTIVE CORI 
ACTIVE CO^E RESIOi 
IOTT0M OF AOTIVE CORE 
iOnON OF SHROUD 
lOTTCW OF PRESSURE VESSEL 
112-2113 
Fig. 5. Sequence of Control Rod Positions during 
Assembly of a Drive to Its Control Rod 


===== PDF PAGE 18 =====
E. Control Rod Drives 
The control rod drive, shown in Fig. 6, was a rack-and-pinion type 
mechanism. A drive of this type was chosen for ALPR for two major 
reasons. First, it was based upon a rather simple design concept. Sec-
ond, a drive quite similar to it had been tested intensively, in a water 
environment, for use in the Army Package Power Reactor (APPR).^-'-^'^^'-^''/ 
The rack and pinion, the pinion-support bearings, and the rack 
backup roller operated in the atmosphere of saturated steam and water 
above the reactor pressure vessel, within a housing mounted on top of 
the vessel. The rack-and-pinion teeth were chrome plated. The pinion-
support ball bearings were of Stellite material. 
The pinion was connected to its electric gear m.otor, located outside 
of the pressure vessel, by a drive shaft. 
Where the pinion drive shaft 
penetrated the rod drive housing, a labyrinth-type pressure-breakdown 
seal was used. 
F. Soluble-Poison System 
As discussed in Section VIII-D, it was decided not to use soluble 
poison for routine operation, or for routine shutdown of the reactor. 
Moreover, there appeared to be no reactivity problem in shutting down 
the reactor with the system of control rods (even if one control rod were 
fully withdrawn) if the reactor was operating at design temperature and 
pressure. 
Therefore, a backup shutdown system, using a relatively con-
centrated solution of boric acid (100 gm HsBOs/gal) at ambient temperature 
was included to provide additional control, if needed, as the tem,perature 
of the reactor water decreased. 
This boric acid system included a hand-
operated pump, to be used when the reactor was at above-atmospheric 
pressure. At atmospheric pressure, the solution could flow into the 
vessel by means of gravity. 
The boric acid system was designed as an 
auxiliary shutdown control measure to be used at the discretion of the 
operations supervisor. It was not designed for use as an emergency-
control device. 


===== PDF PAGE 19 =====
ROD DRIVE HOUSING 
ALL DIMENSIONS 
IN INCHES 
SEAL ELEMENTS 
SEAL WATER INLET 
GUIDE BUSHING 
CONTROL ROD GRIPPER 
CONTROL ROD 
112-2346 
Fig. 6. Control Rod Drive 


===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
V. BASIS OF DESIGN OF CONTROL SYSTEM 
According to the specifications,'^/ the maximum height of the r e -
actor building above grade was 50 feet. Moreover, an air space was to be 
present between the ground and the bottom of the reactor building. In this 
compact plant design, there was no space for a sub-reactor area where 
maintenance of the control rod drives could be performed. 
Consequently, 
the mounting of the control rod drives on top of the reactor was essen-
tially mandatory, 
A special feature of the reactor design was that refueling could 
take place without removing the head of the pressure vessel. This was 
accomplished by sizing the control-rod-drive nozzles, in the top head of 
the pressure vessel, to permit the loading of fuel assemblies through the 
nozzles. It was felt that this concept of fuel handling would simplify 
significantly changes in the core loading in the ultimate power plants.l-'-°/ 
Fuel assembly sizes smaller than 3 in. square were not admitted 
in order to limit the number of fuel assemblies to a tractable value. 
The 
advantages of this limitation were expected to be reduced handling of fuel, 
siraplified accounting, and a lower fabrication cost for the core. 
Various 
arrangeraents of control rods were studied with the goal of a design where 
the cold reactor would be subcritical if any one control rod were with-
drawn, provided that the other control rods were inserted fully into the 
reactor core. Square arrays of nine cross-shaped control rods were con-
sidered for the reference 3-Mwt core. For fuel assembly sizes ranging 
from 3-in, squares to 4-in. squares, it was geometrically impossible to 
set up a 3 X 3 array of control rods so that, at the same time, each central 
compartment contained four fuel assemblies and each rod-drive nozzle 
was sized to pass a fuel assembly. 
The space limitation could not be over-
come even with small, non-standard flanges on these nozzles. 
Moreover, 
it appeared that a central-compartment design of nine fuel assemblies, in 
a 3 X 3 array, would present a difficulty of controlling the cold reactor if 
the central control rod were to be withdrawn. Also, there would have been 
additional complications of loading fuel, in this case. 
If, instead, the size of the control-rod-drive nozzle had been r e -
duced, and separate fuel-loading nozzles had been located farther out 
(radially), a difficult offset loading of fuel assemblies would have been 
required. 
Alternative centerings of systems from control rod drives were in-
vestigated.'>•'•"/ A suggested four-rod configuration was rejected because 
of the difficulty of control with any one rod withdrawn. A design of nine 
control rods and five drives was examined. 
In this concept, each of four 
drives controlled a pair of control rods, and the center rod was controlled 


===== PDF PAGE 21 =====
by the tifth drive. This design was rejected because of the problem of 
imparting linear motion to two rods, by a drive not centered over either 
rod, while maintaining vertical alignment of the rods. 
Consequently, a reference design employing five cross-shaped 
control rods, each with its own drive mechanism, to serve as a movable-
control system for a core of forty, 3"g—in.-square fuel assemblies, was 
selected. 
VI. REACTOR PHYSICS DATA 
The data presented below for the fresh reactor have been taken 
largely from Ref. 4, the Argonne National Laboratory report on the zero-
power reactor physics experiments on the fresh ALPR. The information 
of particular interest for the purposes of the present report concerns 
such raatters of reactor control as: 
(1) the listing of positions of the control rods for criticality; 
(2) the reactor shutdown margin; 
(3) the reactivity gain resulting from a full withdrawal of the 
central control rod from its position of criticality, with the 
other control rods at indicated zero, and the xenon-free 
reactor at room temperature; and 
(4) the reactivity controlled by the burnable-poison strips. 
The SL- 1 was in operation during a period of approximately two 
years, following completion of the program of critical experimentation 
on the fresh system. In that time, an estimated 931 Mwd of thermal 
energy were produced, and some of the U 
fuel atoms and much of the 
B 
burnable-poison atoms were destroyed in the process of neutron ab-
sorption. The values of the reactor-control parameters enumerated 
above varied with time, because of these effects of the production of 
power. 
To these effects one must add the influence of deterioration of 
the burnable-poison strips. Thus, the direct applicability of the data for 
the fresh reactor to the case of the reactor at the time of the incident is 
seriously in question. 
Some control rod calibration experiments were performed in 
August-September, 1960, W/ using a procedure where one or more rods 
not being calibrated were repositioned for criticality. It has been noted 
that such a procedure involves corrections to acco^Jnt for interaction 
effects between control rods. Since the degree of loss of B'' due to strip , 
deterioration is unknown, only the first-listed parameter (critical rod 
position) is known reasonably well as a function of the cumulative energy 
output of the reactor. 


===== PDF PAGE 22 =====
20 
A. The Cold Fresh Reactor (no Xe"^ or Sm^^^)^^) 
In the fresh reference 3-Mwt reactor (ALPR Loading No. 57), criti-
cality was achieved at 94°F with the center control rod at an indicated 
position of 19-1 in. and the other four cross-shaped control rods at indi-
cated zero (fully inserted). Alternatively, the reactor was critical with 
the five cross-shaped control rods banked at an indicated position of 
~12.6 inches. 
At room temperature, this loading was subcritical with the center 
control rod plus any three other control rods fully inserted. 
Without 
poisoning by Sm^^' or Xe^^ , it is doubtful that shutdown of the cold system 
could have been accomplished with two off-center rods withdrawn. How-
ever, early in core life, but after Sm 
had accumulated, it was possible 
to keep the reactor shut down with two off-center rods at 30 inches. 
Prob-
ably the reactor could have been shut down throughout its operating life in 
the absence of one off-center control rod. 
As has been noted (Section IV), the final, fresh reference system 
included 40 full-length poison strips, each containing (nominally) 0.5 gmB^ , 
and 16 half-length strips, each with -0.2 gm B^ . In the course of the zero-
power reactor physics experimentation, an initial 40-fuel-assembly core 
was studied where only the full-length strips were present. In this initial 
system, the reactivity shutdown margin was ~5 dollars (or ~3-|-%). Upon 
adding the half-length strips, the shutdown margin was made still larger, 
though not by much, since to some extent the half-length strips were 
shadowed by the adjacent control rods. 
Two differential-worth measurements were made on the center 
control rod, with the other four rods at zero.* At an indicated position of 
19.3 in., the differential reactivity worth was ~1.1 dollars/inch. 
At 
22.4 in., the worth of the center rod (No. 9) was ~0.57 dollars/inch. 
In 
each case, the differential worth was roughly l y times the differential 
reactivity worth of rod No. 9 as measured from the five-rod bank. As-
suming that this factor (l-|-) applied over the range from 19 in. to 30 in., 
and using Fig. 32 of Ref. 4, it is estimated that the cold, fresh reactor 
would have been supercritical by 4-|- dollars with the center control rod 
at 30 inches. 
The total reactivity worths of burnable-poison strips were meas-
ured with enough boric acid dissolved in the reactor water to attain a 
five-rod-bank position of 20 in, at criticality. The 40 full-length strips 
controlled '-'13 dollars; the 16 half-length strips controlled ~5 dollars. 
*Unpublished. 


===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
B. The Cold Operated Reactor (no Xe^^^) 
The control rod calibrations performed in the fresh reactor, in the 
Fall of 1958, involved the addition of a soluble neutron poison, boric acid 
(H3BO3), to the reactor water so as to calibrate rods from various rod bank 
positions. In August-September, I960, some control rod calibrations were 
made using a procedure of attaining criticality by the repositioning of one 
or more of the rods not being calibrated.V'7) Moreover, the strong neutron 
source was left in place, and this may have introduced perturbations and 
uncertainties in the positive-period rod calibrations. 
It was noted above that the half-length strips provided little extra 
reactivity control when the control rods were inserted fully, because these 
strips were positioned near the surfaces of the thermally-black control 
rod blades. However, as the adjacent control rod was withdrawn, each 
half-length strip became more effective. 
As a result, the curve of differ-
ential reactivity worth of the rod versus rod position, obtained for the initial 
reference core without the half-length strips, was shifted upward and was 
distorted when the half-length strips were added. Thus, one major effect 
of the removal of B^° from these half-length strips, as a result of neutron 
capture and strip deterioration, was to tend to shift the differential worth 
curve back to the curve realized in the fresh reactor in the absence of 
half-length strips. Another effect of power production was to reduce pref-
erentially the U 
content of fuel assemblies in the central 16 fuel assem-
blies and in the bottom half of the reactor core. Two effects of this 
preferential burnup were: 
(1) to reduce the over-all worth of the center control rod, because 
of the relatively lower fuel content near the center of the r e -
actor core; and 
(2) to increase the control capacity of this rod, because of the 
increase in the "thermal migration area" in the vicinity of 
the rod. 
It is the opinion of the authors that the net effect of actual reactor opera-
tion was to increase the differential worth of the central control rod in the 
bottom half of the reactor core, relative to the differential worth curve 
obtained in the fresh reactor. 1^^/ If this is indeed the case, then the curves 
of "estimated shutdown margin"l2lj underestimate the per cent subcriti-
cality in the operated reactor in the situation where all five control rods 
were inserted fully. 
The conclusion would be that even without the total of 
six extra cadmium blades added in two tee-rod locations in November, I960 
(Section V I I - A ) , throughout its period of operation the cold, xenon-free 
reactor would have been subcritical by more than 3 dollars with all five 
cross-shaped control rods at indicated zero. 


===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
There is no measured datum point for the critical position of the 
center rod, with the other rods at zero, on the morning of the day of the 
incident. An estimate of 16.7 in. has been reported;(22) this point is shown 
on Fig. 7. Thus, there appears to have been a margin of at least one (l) ft 
between the point of delayed criticality and the maximum position speci-
fied in the written instructions^ 
z for assembling the control rod drive to 
its rod (Fig. 5). 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1000 
TOTAL THERMAL ENERGY OUTPUT, Mwd 
112-2343 
Fig. 7. Critical Positions of Control Rods at Room Temperature 
vs Total Energy Output (No Xenon-135). [Data shown have 
been taken from Ref. 24] 
Vll. EVALUATION OF THE PERFORMANCE OF 
THE CONTROL SYSTEM 
A. Burnable-Poison Strips 
After approximately 400 Mwd of reactor operation (February, I960) 
it became evident that the actual rod bank position, at power, was dropping 
much more rapidly than had been expected. 
During a periodic inspection of fuel assemblies, in August, 1959, 
it had been observed that some bowing of burnable-poison strips had oc-
curred between fusion welds which held the strips to the side plates of fuel 
assemblies.(25) in August, I960, a second inspection of fuel assemblies 
revealed that poison strips were deteriorating.!^^/ Removal of fuel 


===== PDF PAGE 25 =====
23 
assemblies from the region of the center of the reactor core was accom-
plished only after considerable difficulty. 
These assemblies were bound 
tightly within the four-assembly compartment, probably because of the 
extreme bowing and deterioration of the poison strips in this region of 
higher power density. In the peripheral region of the reactor core, fuel 
assemblies were not held tightly, and the burnable-poison strips appeared 
to be in much better condition. (These remarks about the condition of 
burnable-poison strips are based on the remote viewing of a small num-
ber of samples at some distance under water.)\25) 
It is probable that, in part, the progressive lowering of the critical 
position of the control-rod bank during reactor operation was due to a 
more rapid loss of B'' from the reactor core, because of burnup and/or 
strip deterioration, than had been anticipated. 
To compensate for this ap-
parent loss in stationary reactivity control, in November, I960, three 
cadmium blades were inserted in each of two diametrically opposite loca-
tions of tee-shaped rods.i^"/ 
These served as fixed, tee-shaped control 
rods in the reactor core. 
From accelerated-corrosion experiments performed at Argonne 
National Laboratory, using water at 500*'F, it appears that the type of 
bowing exhibited by the SL-1 poison strips would occur in the absence of 
neutron radiation, simply because of strip growth resulting from exposure 
of the constrained thin plates to hot water. 
The bowing reflects the forces 
of this volume expansion between the fusion welds which defined the r e -
gions of constraint. V^'/ 
Personnel of Combustion Engineering, Inc., have reported results 
of various tests performed on samples of poison strips, including, among 
others: (28) 
(1) metallographic inspection both of irradiated and of unirra-
diated samples; 
(2) 
corrosion tests in a water environment approximating the 
operating conditions of SL- 1 except for the absence of a 
neutron radiation field. 
For the corrosion experiments, irradiated samples were taken 
from poison strips which had been in the SL-1 core. Unirradiated samples 
were taken from an unused poison strip. 
Some summary remarks and conclusions of particular interest 
are:(28) 
(1) 
"A dependency of corrosion rate on boron burn-up was found 
by post-irradiation corrosion tests. The section of one of the 
recovered poison strips taken from the high flux end of the 


===== PDF PAGE 26 =====
24 
remnant exhibited a calculated penetration after 42 days of 
test greater than 10 times that of either an unirradiated 
sample or sections taken from lower flux regions of the same 
recovered poison strip. Corrosion behavior of the lower flux 
sections were similar to unirradiated samples. These data 
are indicative of a possible threshold burn-up value for ac-
celerated corrosion attack." 
(2) 
"Further evidence of the possible boron burn-up dependency 
of corrosion behavior was obtained from visual examination of 
entire lengths of poison strip remnants in which excessive 
pitting was observed to be concentrated near the irregular 
(high burn-up) end. Metallographic sections through these r e -
gions confirmed the existence of gross general corrosion in 
these areas." 
(3) 
"Swelling of the Al -B plates on the order of 12% occurred as 
a result of the helium generated during the B^° iiEi^Li^ 
transmutation." 
(4) 
"There is a high probability that the failure of these poison 
strips was (sic) attributed to either excessive corrosion, cor-
rosion induced embrittlement, or a combination of corrosion 
induced mechanisms together with porosity and crack forma-
tion occurring at the high burn-up regions of the poison strips." 
B. Sticking of Control Rods 
During reactor operation, a history of 84 occasions of "sticking of 
the control rods" was accumulated. 
This "sticking" has been categorized 
into three types:(29) 
"Type I - Sticking of a control rod resulting in failure to meet the 
drop time requirements (one second for 10" drop; two seconds 
for a 30" drop) and which did not require a power assist from the 
drive assembly." 
"Type II - Sticking of a control rod in which the control rod stopped 
and required a power assist to enable the control rod to reach its 
zero position (even if it subsequently fell free at a lower level)." 
"Type III - Sticking of a control rod in which it was not possible to 
drive the control rod in a desired direction, e.g., clutch slippage 
during a rod withdrawal, or failure of a drive assembly shear key 
or gears resulting in failure to drive a control rod," 
There were 19 Type-I, 52 Type-II, and 13 Type-Ill stickings. 


===== PDF PAGE 27 =====
So far as we know, no measurements were made, with the reactor 
at operating temperature and pressure, to check the dimensions of the 
pressure vessel head with regard to alignment of the drive mechanisms 
and the control rods. However, it is difficult to see why, if there had been 
misalignment of a control rod drive relative to the control rod guide 
shroud, stickings did not occur in a much greater percentage of the rod 
movements. 
During the early post-incident investigations, it was suggested that 
bowing of poison strips might have led to bending of control rod guide 
shrouding, with a resultant narrowing of the control rod channels. This is 
no longer offered as an explanation of "rod stickings" experienced during 
reactor operation. In one instance (November, I960), a "burr" was r e -
moved from one control rod guide shroud, l^^/ This did not eliminate 
stickings in this location. Indeed, after the burr removal, a total of nine 
stickings occurred within a period of ly months, out of a total of 20 such 
occurrences between May, 1959 and the end of 1960.131) 
Post-incident examination of the shrouds and the control rod blades 
has revealed that only a thin film of corrosion was present. Rub marks 
and scratches found on the guide shrouds and control rod blades are at-
tributed to normal wear during pre-incident operation. No evidence of 
inward bowing or warping of the shroud, or abnormal wear of rods or 
shrouding was found. Also, there was no evidence of a buildup of crud in 
the control rod channels. V l^/ 
Among other possible causes of what has been termed "control rod 
sticking" are: 
(1) 
Crud in the rod drive seal; 
(2) 
Crud in, and wear of the Stellite, pinion-support ball bearings; 
(3) 
Crud in, and wear and corrosion of the replacement pinion-
support standard-alloy carbon steel ball bearings. It was found 
that, due to wear, the Stellite, pinion-support ball bearings 
were operating somewhat erratically. Subsequently, because 
Stellite bearings were not readily available, standard-alloy 
carbon steel bearings were usedi^^j and were replaced from 
time to time. These ball bearings are highly susceptible to 
corrosion. 
(4) A "hydraulic piston" effect - a momentary partial vacuum in 
the space above the rack as the rod was dropped. This effect 
had been noticed during the testing of a prototype rod drive 
mechanism at Argonne National Laboratory. 
Consequently, 
the washer on top of the rack was modified (reduced slightly 
in diameter) to permit a more rapid equalization of pressures 


===== PDF PAGE 28 =====
between the reactor and the top of the rack housing. 
This 
modification appeared to have eliminated the effect, as shown 
by further testing. A piston effect of this sort has been ob-
served on a similar drive mechanism, intended for another 
reactor.i^/ 
The degree of this effect is influenced by such 
parameters as reactor pressure and water temperature, seal-
water inlet temperature, and the level of water in the rack 
housing. 
In summary, no one cause of the stickings has been established. 
It 
is very likely that there were several contributing factors. 
VIII. CRITIQUE OF THE CONTROL SYSTEM; GENERALIZATIONS 
A. Top Mounting vs Bottom Mounting of Control Rod Drives 
Early in the post-incident investigation, several possibilities were 
discussed which illustrate the decreased accident potential of bottom-
moiinted control rod drives. It was noted earlier in this report that, for 
the ALPR, the top mounting of rod drives was essentially mandatory. A 
possible cause of the incident, suggested during the post-incident investi-
gation, was that a gas explosion had occurred in the pressure vessel. 
When it was discovered that a nuclear transient had occurred, it was con-
jectured that hydrogen had accumulated in the vessel, had exploded, and 
had raised one or more control rods far enough to initiate a flux transient. 
In the SL-1, the likelihood of a hydrogen buildup was extremely remote, 
in the state of assembly existing at the time of the incident, because of the 
relatively large clearances in the drive mechanism components. 
However, 
in another reactor design with top-mounted drives, such an accumulation 
of an explosive gas might occur. If there were a gas explosion, it is con-
ceivable that control rods would be raised and that a nuclear transient 
might result. 
In the case of bottom-mounted rod drives, usually the lower 
grid structure serves as a positive stop of the control rods in their posi-
tion of full reactivity control. Thus, a pressure transient would tend to 
hold control rods in the configuration of maximum effectiveness. 
In the SL- 1 incident, control rod guide shrouds collapsed soon 
enough to trap the off-center control rods essentially in the position of 
full insertion. When the shield plugs were ejected from the vessel, the 
off-center rods were held by the shrouding, and breaks occurred at 
weaker points, in the drive naechanisms. Otherwise, withdrawal of the 
center control rod might have led to a raising of other control rods, and 
possibly to a more energetic transient. 


===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
27 
For other reactor designs where control rod drives are to be 
naounted on the top head or bottom head of a pressure vessel, one should 
consider the following merits of bottom mounting: 
(1) Bottom mounting of drives would reduce congestion of equip-
ment on the top head of the pressure vessel, making access 
easier. 
(2) 
Whenever the top head of the pressure vessel is to be re-
moved, for example for fuel handling, the system of control 
rods could remain fully operative. Among the obvious ad-
vantages are: 
(a) 
accurate indication of rod position at all times; 
(b) the possibility of using rods as "cocked" safety rods; and 
(c) 
less frequent handling of control rods. 
In judging relative advantages of top mounting and bottom moionting 
of control rod drives in fluid-cooled reactors, there are disadvantages of 
bottom mounting that must be weighed. Among these are: 
(1) 
In a cornpact plant, it might be difficult to provide the additional 
space required below the reactor vessel for the drives and for 
their maintenance. Also, additional shielding below the reactor 
vessel might be required. 
(2) 
Corrosion products and other debris tend to collect or settle 
in drive thimbles at the bottom of the reactor vessel and inter-
fere with drive mechanism operation. Since some of this 
naaterial is radioactive, drive mechanism, maintenance and 
replacement would become a more difficult task. 
(3) Openings in the bottom head of the pressure vessel increase 
the likelihood of an inadvertent draining of coolant from the 
vessel. In the event of rupture of a drive thimble, it would be 
difficult to maintain adequate shutdown cooling of the fuel 
assemblies. 
The choice between top mounting and bottom mounting of the drive 
mechanisms must be specific to the particular reactor design, although, 
in general, bottom inounting appears to be preferable. 
B. Assembly (Disassembly) of the Drive to Its Control Rod 
If the SL- 1 incident occurred as postulated (Section III), three 
aspects of the control system design and assembly procedure were factors: 


===== PDF PAGE 30 =====
(1) 
The reactor could achieve super-prompt criticality, with 
the center rod partially withdrawn, even though the other four 
rods were inserted fully into the core. 
(2) 
The procedure for attaching a drive mechanism to its control 
rod required that the rod be raised manually. 
(3) Mechanical stops, which would limit the upward manual motion 
of the control rod, ^were not included. 
A discussion of item (l) is presented in Section VIII-E, Items (2) 
and (3) are discussed below. 
In the procedure of disassembling a drive from its control rod, in 
SL- 1, once the seal and rack housings were removed, the control rod 
rested on the internal dashpot spring. The next step was to raise the con-
trol rod a short distance in order to attach a C-clamp to the rack so as to 
prevent it from dropping while the nut and washer were being removed 
from the top of the rack. In this step, the normal procedure required the 
cooperative efforts of two men, one to lift or hold the rod, and the other to 
attach or remove the C-clamp. 
Subsequently, this clamp was to be r e -
moved and the control rod lowered to its rest position. 
In formiulating the instructions for operations personnel for the 
disassembly (or assembly) of a drive mechanism from its control rod, ac-
count was taken of the hazard of withdrawing the center control rod too far. 
The instructions stated explicitly that no control rod was to be raised 
more than 4 in.l^Sj during the disassembly (or assembly) procedure. In 
other words, the control rod was not to be raised beyond an indicated posi-
tion of 4 in. (Fig. 5). The normal procedure was to work with only one 
control rod unit at any given time. The other control rods were to be in-
serted fully. However, very little reactivity would have been added had 
all five cross control rods been at 4 in., indicated position, and the control 
margin was sufficient to override this extra reactivity. At this point, be-
cause the absorber overlapped the core when the rod was at indicated 
zero, the bottom of the cadmium section was approximately one (l) in. 
above the bottom of the active reactor core. At the time of the incident, 
with the other four cross-shaped control rods at indicated zero, it is 
estimated^") that, to reach delayed criticality, the center rod would have 
had to be raised at least one (l) ft more than the instructions specified. 
This left a substantial safety margin for manual manipulation of the con-
trol rods. 
Two other factors which lessened the likelihood of a fast rod with-
drawal into the region of supercriticality were the weight of the mass 
being lifted (85 lb in water), and the congestion of equipment on the pres-
sure vessel head, which tended to restrict bodily movements. 


===== PDF PAGE 31 =====
29 
In spite of these various factors, acting to reduce the probability 
of a nuclear incident being caused by manual withdrawal of the center 
control rod, it appears that just such an incident, in fact, did occur. 
It is now evident that the procedure selected to connect the control 
rod to its drive, though simple in concept, had an essential disadvantage, 
namely, the requirement of manual lifting of the rod. This disadvantage 
could not have been overcome by the addition of one or more mechanical 
stops, positioned so as to limit the upward travel of the rod during the 
assembly. It was not intended that the operation of attaching the drive to 
its control rod would be performed often, or that it would be a routine 
procedure. Nevertheless, less reliance should have been placed on the 
following of instructions and on the margins for error described above. 
In retrospect, it is clear that a different method of disassembly and a s -
sembly should have been designed, namely, one which did not require 
raising of the control rod from its position of full insertion. Reliance on 
mechanical stops is illusory, for, at some point during the procedure, the 
stops must be engaged and then they must be removed. Personnel per-
forming the assembly operation might become so dependent on the safe-
guard afforded by these stops that a lessened vigilance could lead to an 
accident because of an unrealized failure to actuate them. 
It must be remembered that, in typical control system designs, 
there is normally no indication of rod position when the control rod is not 
attached to its drive mechanism. 
This ignorance of rod position com-
pounds the hazard of assembly, and it exists whether the control rod is 
moved manually or by other means. Therefore, such an assembly/ 
disassembly operation requires careful supervision, and must not be con-
sidered routine. In this type of operation, as well as in others involving 
a possible increase in reactivity, use of a checklist system would tend to 
lessen the hazard. 
C. Burnable Poison 
In the early stages of the design of ALPR, various thermal-neutron 
absorbers were considered for use as burnable poisons.(33) Among those 
nuclides considered, having microscopic thermal neutron absorption cross 
sections in the range of hundreds of barns to thousands of barns, were 
Li , B'^ , Eu'^ ^, and Hg 
. These absorbers offer advantages of burning up 
slowly enough, in a thermal neutron flux of the order of 10 n-cm/(cm -sec), 
to supply reactivity at a rate roughly commensurable with the rate of loss 
of reactivity resulting from the consumption of U^^ . The B^ isotope was 
considered to be particularly useful for ALPR, for several reasons: 
(l) 
the B^ is consumed at a sufficiently high rate that little of it 
would have been left, by the end of a core cycle, in regions of 
high statistical importance; 


===== PDF PAGE 32 =====
30 
(2) there was more over-all experience with boron, as a burnable 
poison, than with any of the other isotopes mentioned above; 
and 
(3) B'"' was available, in a reasonably pure form of boron highly 
enriched in B^°, at a relatively low cost. 
The basic ALPR core design involved the use of boron, highly en-
riched in B^°, as a constituent of the fuel-plate core. The intention was to 
provide a negative reactivity contribution of approximately 11%, in the cold 
fresh reactor. 
This was to counteract most of the positive reactivity effect 
of adding U 
to the fresh reactor to meet the requirements of power pro-
duction for a core cycle of three years. It was not until contractual r e -
search and development programs failed to produce suitable fuel plates 
that the design concept of mixing fuel and burnable poison was altered.(3) 
Much theoretical work has been performed to examine the subtle-
ties of using burnable poisons in discrete masses, such as rods or strips, 
(For example, see Ref. 34.) Even when a poison supposedly is homogene-
ously distributed in a fuel-plate core, there may be a significant loss in 
effectiveness because of the microscopic lump structure.(35) Ideally, with 
a freedom of choice permitted in varying the location of the poison in the 
reactor core, and in varying the mass of poison per unit surface area of 
the poison lump, one can minimize the reactivity variation resulting from 
equilibrium power production. However, for single-batch core loadings, 
additional fissionable material would be needed initially to counteract the 
negative reactivity effect of the neutron poison remaining at the end of the 
core cycle. The amount of this extra fissionable material would depend 
upon the statistically averaged relative absorption rates of the burnable 
poison and the fuel, and upon the statistically averaged fractional burnup 
of fuel atoms. 
Often, a designer attempting to use burnable poison in a power 
reactor operating at high temperature encounters problems of fabrication 
and/or problems peculiar to the particular choice of neutron poison or 
the form in which the poison is to be introduced. In the case of the 
burnable-poison strips of ALPR (Section I V - B ) , there had been earlier 
experience, in the BORAX-III core, with similar strips fabricated by 
powder metallurgy techniques.(14) This favorable experience of some 
six months use of burnable-poison strips in BORAX-III proved to be mis-
leading, in terms of an expectation that strips of this type would be satis-
factory for the anticipated core cycle of three years. Since the incident, 
additional experimentation at ANL has shown that poison strips as thin 
as the ones used in ALPR are not strong enough to resist the forces of 
a volume expansion resulting from the corrosion of the strip.(36) 
Prob-
ably, this growth in strip size in SL-1 caused a bowing of the strip in the 
regions between points of constraint where the strip was fusion-welded to 


===== PDF PAGE 33 =====
a side plate of a fuel assembly. Even now, considering information avail-
able concerning the influence of neutron radiation on the corrosion rate of 
a poison strip of this type (Section VII-A), it is not loiown whether the use 
of much thicker strips, e.g., twice as thick as those used, would have en-
sured that the burnable-poison strips would remain in good condition for 
the entire core cycle. For that matter, it is not certain that, if the B'' had 
been dispersed in the core matrix, the fuel plates would have remained in 
such excellent condition for a three-year core cycle. 
The unfavorable experience, in SL-1, with poison strips having a 
carrier of aluminum-nickel alloy should be instructive in two major 
respects. First, it is clear that extrapolation from an experience of a 
relatively short period of prototype testing to a situation where the item 
is to be in service for a very much longer period of time is uncertain, at 
best. In the event that such an extrapolation is forced upon the designer, 
a special effort should be made, during subsequent reactor operation, to 
check on the continued serviceability of the itein at specified, regular in-
tervals. This is not a novel suggestion, but all too often such checking is 
not performed often enough, or is performed haphazardly. Second, since 
burnable poison is an agent of reactor control, it is all the more important 
that it remain in its intended location and contribute a positive reactivity 
component at an expected rate. A dramatic deviation in the control r e -
quirement of the adjustable control system, either in the form of a sudden 
change or in the form of a sustained and steadily increasing deviation 
should be cause for a prompt, detailed examination of the poison carriers. 
Burnable poisons can serve a variety of control purposes in reac-
tors, and it is likely that they will receive increasing attention. In 
boiling-water reactors, another control scheme that could provide shim 
control and, possibly, essentially the entire control of the reactor, is that 
of soluble poison. 
D. Soluble Poison 
The use of soluble neutron poisons for control of thermal, water-
moderated reactors has been discussed in severalreports and articles,i3'>-
At various stages in the formulation of the ALPR design, serious consid-
eration was given to the use of boric acid solution for: 
(l) reactivity 
control at teinperatures ranging from ambient to operating ( 4 2 0 ° F ) ; or 
(2) routine, auxiliary shutdown of the reactor; or (3) non-routine, auxiliary 
shutdown. In the following paragraphs, attention is focused upon the prob-
lems, technical and/or logistical, which led to a decision to use boric acid 
only for non-routine, auxiliary shutdown of the ALPR. 
It should be realized that special logistical needs played a vital 
role in this decision for the ALPR. Since then, soluble poison has been 
employed in other ways for control of boiling water reactors, as discussed 
briefly in the second part of this section. 


===== PDF PAGE 34 =====
32 
The ultimate reactors, for which the ALPR was to serve as a pro-
totype, were to be situated in geographically renaote locations. In the de-
sign specificationsi^) jt was indicated that a source of fresh water might 
or might not be available, other than melted snow, and that this water 
probably would contain much mineral and organic matter. Also, in view 
of the difficulty and the cost of transporting plant components to these 
sites, considerable emphasis was placed on the design of a small, com-
pact plant. Consequently, a basic criterion adopted by the reactor de-
signers was the minimization of requirements of water supply, storage of 
demineralized water, and storage of radioactive waste water. 
Since the reactor plants were to relieve problems of logistics in 
supplying petroleum for diesel generators, it was important to minimize 
the dependence on power from these generators which were to serve for 
emergency power production. For this reason, it was stipulated that "the 
nuclear plant must be capable of restarting after a shutdown occurring 
anytime during the core life" (Appendix A, Operational Requirements, 3). 
In particular, this meant that it was necessary to be able to take the re-
actor to full power after shutdown. 
Auxiliary Shutdown of ALPR 
If, as a routine procedure of reactor shutdown, enough boric acid 
were introduced into the reactor water to keep the cold, xenon-free reac-
tor subcritical with any one control rod withdrawn, it is doubtful that the 
aforementioned criterion of power operation would have been met. A 
compromise would have been to add a smaller amount of boric acid, to 
reduce the magnitude of the excess reactivity potential in withdrawal of 
the center control rod. 
Renaoval of the boric acid from the reactor water could have been 
accomplished by one of several methods, each method requiring additional 
equipment and/or additional material or storage space: 
(1) by pumping reactor water through ion exchange columns con-
taining a special resin, and returning the clean water to the 
reactor; 
(2) by distilling reactor water containing boric acid, and returning 
the clean water to the reactor; or 
(3) by massive dilutions of the reactor water with demLineralized 
water. 
In principle, methods (l) and (2) above, are quite similar. In both 
cases, the initial concentration, N(0), of boric acid in the reactor water is 
reduced according to an exponential law: 
N(t) = N(0) exp(-t/T) 


===== PDF PAGE 35 =====
Here, N(t) is the boric acid concentration at a time t after the initiation 
of cleanup; T is the time required to process, on a once-through basis, a 
volume of water equal to that in the pressure vessel, the purification sys-
tem, and any other components which contain water to be purified; and the 
assumptions have been made that cleanup is 100% effective, and that the 
clean water is mixed uniformly and continuously with the water being 
purged. Typically, in a boiling water reactor, the coolant fluid is kept 
clean by low-rate, continuous purge. This was the case for the ALPR. 
Consequently, unless special provisions had been made to increase sub-
stantially the rate of cleanup, for example, by use of a separate purge sys-
tem, it would have taken many hours to remove, say, 90% of the boric acid. 
If ion-exchange columns had been used for removal of boric acid, 
a large inventory of costly resin would have been required, sufficient for 
the period between times of accessibility for supply to the remote site. 
Cleanup by distillation would have required additional equipment, including 
means of flushing the residue, and probably would have involved extensive 
use of diesel-generator power if full auxiliary shutdown control by boric 
acid were employed. 
The third method, that of massive dilution of the reactor water, 
would have required a much larger supply of demineralized water and a 
larger sump for radioactive waste water. 
The reactor designers concluded that the special logistics problems 
of the ultimate plant made it highly tmdesirable to use soluble poison for 
routine auxiliary control for shutdown. Therefore, the soluble-poison 
system of ALPR was designed for non-routine, backup control, to be used 
at the discretion of the operations supervisor. 
In the prototype plant itself, there was less reason not to add boric 
acid solution routinely in the process of reactor shutdown. Cleanup by 
ion exchange was feasible, though costly and slow. Moreover, this pro-
cedure of shutdown would have been special to the prototype plant. 
Never-
theless, if such an incident as did occur had not been considered to be so 
unlikely, probably the routine addition of boric acid would have been made 
an integral part of the procedure of shutdown of the prototype reactor 
whenever assembly of the drive to (or disassembly of it from) the central 
control rod was to be performed. 
Operational Control with Soluble Poison 
For an early conceptual version of the ALPR, consideration was 
given to a control system where boric acid, in solution, would supplant 
the customary control by rods, with the exception of perhaps one control 
rod available and cocked as a safety rod, 139) 


===== PDF PAGE 36 =====
It is doubtful that a good core design would have permitted the use 
of enough soluble poison to preclude the need for an auxiliary control in 
the form of a burnable poison. Without burnable poison, so much control 
capacity would have been needed that there might have been a large initial 
positive void coefficient in the cold fresh reactor. Also, at this time, not 
enough data had been accumulated from operating boiling-water reactors 
to support the use of a soluble-poison control system at operating tem-
perature ( 4 2 0 ° F ) in the ALPR. 
Now, there is more information available about the use of soluble 
poison for control of boiling water reactors. Boric acid has been used for 
shim control of the YANKEE reactor.(40) in the course of the recent ex-
periments where the EBWR power level was raised to 100 Mwt, boric acid 
was used to assist control of the reactor. 
The H3BO3 concentration was 
adjusted as reactor power was varied. 
These are rather special uses of 
soluble poison, and they do not adequately demonstrate the full utility of 
soluble poison in boiling water reactors, namely, for control of a power 
reactor at operating conditions for long periods of time. There remain 
questions as to how well a particular boiling-water reactor would perform 
with a dilution/concentration procedure of routine reactor operation with 
soluble-poison control. A reliable procedure for controlling the boric acid 
concentration in the reactor water would be required. Also, it would be 
useful, but perhaps not essential, to have a procedure of sampling the r e -
actor water at regular intervals, or continuously, and determining the 
boric acid concentration. A typical cleanup procedure (e.g., ion exchange) 
is slow. On the other hand, it is precisely this slowness of cleanup that is 
one of the safety advantages of control by soluble poison, for unintentional 
removal of poison from the reactor water would be a slow process, 
E. Reactor Shutdown Margin 
The concept of "reactor shutdown margin" has been defined rather 
poorly, in the past, in terms of its significance for an evaluation of hazards 
associated with a given reactor design. Sometimes, what is listed as the 
shutdown margin is the numerical value of the shutdown margin in the 
fresh reactor. 
This is defined to be the per cent reactivity by which the 
reactor is subcritical, with the normal control system fully effective, and 
with the reactor otherwise at its maximum reactivity. 
Typically, the r e -
actor possesses maximum reactivity when it is cold and there is minimum 
void and xenon in the reactor core. This concept of shutdown margin is 
too limited, for often the fresh reactor offers less of a hazard than a r e -
actor which has been operated at power and in which fission products have 
accumulated. 
More generally, the shutdown margin is the smallest value of r e -
activity that must be added to bring the reactor to delayed criticality, at 
any time in reactor life, and under all possible reactor states of tempera-
ture, pressure, etcetera, when the normal, adjustable reactivity-control 


===== PDF PAGE 37 =====
system is exercising its maximum effect. 
If, as m the case of the SL-1 
reactor, a backup, non-emergency control system is available, some of 
this auxiliary control may be added when needed to increase the shutdown 
margin. However, unless such auxiliary control is introduced automati-
cally, and rapidly, its effect should not be included in the determination of 
the numerical value of the shutdown margin. 
It has been pointed outi^l) that even the more general concept of 
shutdown margin may be inadequate as a criterion to be used in assessing 
the safety of a proposed reactor. Batesl^l) has assembled data concern-
ing the shutdown margin for a number of power reactors, illustrating a 
remarkably large variation in what different design groups have considered 
to be acceptable or desirable. One should not infer that a given reactor 
design, with an actual shutdown margin of, say, 6% reactivity, would have 
been unacceptable if the margin had been only 4%. Normal design practice 
requires that the calculated shutdown margin be conservative, relative to 
actual needs, to allow for uncertainty in the calculation. 
A margin of reactor control is required for a variety of reasons, 
and the size of this margin is set, in part, by these reasons. For exanaple, 
the shutdown margin should be large enough so that one need not be overly 
much concerned about the reactivity hazards of small errors in fuel 
loading. In the SL-1 reactor, the shutdown margin was in excess of 2% 
reactivity, and probably at least 3%, even without the total of six cadmium 
blades added (November, I960) in two of the four tee-rod locations for 
additional fixed control. (The cold fresh reactor was subcritical by ap-
proximately S-y % with all five cross-shaped control rods at indicated 
zero.) This margin was more than enough to override such possible mis-
takes in fuel loading changes as: 
(1) the inadvertent loading of a fuel assembly without poison 
strips; 
(2) 
a mis orientation of a fuel assembly; or 
(3) the addition of an extra fuel assembly at the periphery of the 
reactor core. 
Moreover, it appears that, at any time during core life, removal of 
any one of the off-center cross-shaped control rods would have left the 
reactor subcritical if the four remaining cross-shaped control rods were 
inserted fully. 
Yet, the shutdown margin was instifficient, in the sense that 
presumably it was the withdrawal of the central control rod that led to the 
transient that destroyed the SL-1 core on January 3, 1961. 
F. The "Single-Mistake" Criterion 
In the case of SL-1, each cross control rod was of a large span 
(14 in. of absorber), and the rods were so far apart that withdrawal of the 


===== PDF PAGE 38 =====
36 
center rod effectively left unprotected a portion of the core that was large 
in terms of the characteristic diffusion distance of thermal neutrons. As 
a result, the cold fresh reactor was supercritical in the absence of the 
center control rod. So far as can be ascertained at this time, the SL-1 in-
cident could have been brought about, in the same manner, in the fresh 
reactor. 
It would be tempting to state categorically that no future reactor 
design should be accepted if, at some time in reactor life, and at certain 
conditions of temperature, pressure, etcetera, withdrawal of a single com-
ponent of the control system (e.g., a single control rod) would result in 
reactor supercriticality even though the rest of the control system was 
fully effective. 
Certainly, it should be a prime goal of the design effort 
to avoid such a possibility. 
It naay be, however, that in the avoidance of 
this undesirable situation, the reactor design would be affected adversely 
in other important respects. In such a case, the reactor designers must 
arrive at a decision as to the extent of a compromise of the conflicting 
goals. 
In the ALPR, the gearings of the rack-and-pinion drive were chosen 
so as to limit the reactivity insertion rate to approximately 0.01%/sec in 
the cold fresh reactor.(42) This rate is in sharp contrast to the very 
much higher reactivity insertion rate that could be achieved by manual 
rod withdrawal, when the drive was disconnected from its rod. From data 
obtained and tests performed by Combustion Engineering, Inc.(7) and by 
the General Electric Co.,i°)it may be inferred that a reactivity addition 
rate of perhaps 20%/sec could have been obtained by a rapid manual with-
drawal of the center control rod at the time of the SL- 1 incident. 
This 
result dramatically illustrated a possible hazard of rod handling in a shut-
down reactor, whether or not the SL-1 incident was caused in this way. 
In some reactor designs it may be feasible to require that, before 
any control rods may be handled manually, enough fuel must be removed 
from the shutdown reactor so that it would remain subcritical even if all 
control rods were withdrawn fully. 
The fuel would be stored in a suitably 
controlled facility until the control rod drives were reassembled to their 
rods. 
One alternative to this procedure is to introduce temporary addi-
tional control as a routine procedure in the process of reactor shutdown. 
For example, in the case of a water-moderated reactor controlled by a 
system of control rods, perhaps boric acid solution could be introduced 
into the reactor water during shutdown, for additional protection of the 
cold reactor. 
Soluble poison was not used in this manner in ALPR, for 
reasons stated in Section VIII-D. 


===== PDF PAGE 39 =====
A less restrictive condition that may be acceptable is that no 
single mistake in manipulation, and no single malfunction of one compo-
nent of the reactivity-control system should lead to an excursion that 
would damage the reactor or result in a serious hazard to personnel. 
Thus, for example, if, upon full withdrawal of a single control rod, 
the system would be below prompt critical, at worst a relatively slow rise 
in the level of neutron flux would result, and the reactor should be capable 
of compensating automatically for this excess reactivity, either because 
of negative reactivity coefficients or by virtue of an auxiliary and/or 
emergency control system., without a transient that would damage the r e -
actor or would expose personnel to a severe radiation hazard or to other 
serious injury. 
In any event, the reactor design should be such that, 
whether or not the reactor is damaged, personnel in the area would not 
suffer serious injury; for some types of reactors, this less restrictive 
criterion might be satisfied even if the net uncompensated reactivity was 
more than one (l) dollar. 
IX, SUMMARY AND REMARKS 
The SL-1 incident has focused attention on certain design features 
and operating procedures of the prototype nuclear reactor power plant. 
In this report, emphasis has been placed on the design and the perform-
ance of the ALPR (SL- l) reactivity control system. 
Criteria for the 
reactor and the attendant motivations for the control system design have 
been reviewed. 
The post-incident investigations and reviews have spotlighted such 
diverse features of reactor design and performance as: deterioration of 
burnable-poison strips; top mounting of the control rod drives; "sticking 
of control rods"; the fact that at least partial insertion of the center con-
trol rod was required for reactor shutdown under certain conditions; and 
the procedure of assembling the control rod drives to their respective 
control rods. 
It is now clear that such an incident, in principle, could have oc-
curred in the unoperated prototype reactor, under conditions where the 
burnable-poison strips were intact and where the control'rods operated 
freely. 
Under certain circumstances, in other reactor designs involving 
the use of top-mounted control rod drives, a non-nuclear accident might 
initiate a nuclear excursion. 
For exanaple, a gas explosion inside a 
pressure vessel would exert a force on components of the control rod 
drives, possibly lifting the control rods. It has been shown that such an 


===== PDF PAGE 40 =====
38 
event did not occur in the SL-1, Thus, top mounting played only an in-
direct role in initiating the incident, largely through its influence on the 
procedure of attaching drives to the control rods, in terms of the sequence 
of events postulated for the incident. 
Various designs of systems of control rods were considered for 
the ALPR, in an attempt to secure a system where reactor shutdown was 
assured in the event of a full withdrawal of any one control rod. The final 
choice was a design compromise wherein the control provided by the 
center control rod plus any three of the four other control rods was suffi-
cient for shutdown of the reactor in its state of highest reactivity. 
The 
designs of the control rod and drive were tailored to a simple assembly-
disassembly procedure, which involved a manual lifting of the control rod 
to a position only a few inches above its position of full insertion. Written 
instructions for the procedure of assembling a drive to its control rod 
specified that the rod was not to be raised more than 4 inches.v'-3) 
This 
left a margin of at least one (l) ft additional withdrawal of the center con-
trol rod, even to the position of delayed criticality. Other features of the 
reactor design militated against a withdrawal of a control rod so far and 
so rapidly as to cause a dangerous nuclear excursion. 
Yet, all available 
evidence indicates that the SL-1 excursion was caused by a manual with-
drawal of the center control rod. 
In retrospect, it is clear that less reliance should have been placed 
on awareness of hazards and on written instructions. Perhaps a checklist 
procedure would have prevented this particular incident, but this falls 
into the same category. Instead, a different assembly procedure, not r e -
quiring the manual raising of control rods, should have been designed. 
Also, there should have been even greater emphasis on achieving a r e -
actor design wherein, when the other control rods were inserted fully, 
rapid withdrawal of a single control rod could not lead to a catastrophic 
reactor excursion. 
One must remember that, so long as a reactor can be made super-
critical by the motion of a control rod, it is conceivable that a nuclear 
incident could be initiated by rod withdrawal. This is less likely if the 
reactor can be shut down with any single control rod withdrawn. How-
ever, the satisfaction of the latter condition does not eliminate the possi-
bility of such an event. For example, if some of the other control rods 
were withdrawn partially, a fast partial withdrawal of one control rod then 
might lead to a short-period excursion. 
Reactor designers must take into account the practical aspects of 
actual reactor operation. 
They should communicate to the reactor oper-
ators their motivations for the particular choices of reactor design, 
stressing known potential hazards of the design selected. 
It would be 


===== PDF PAGE 41 =====
useful if the designers also indicated disadvantages and potential hazards 
of alternative, rejected designs, for then the reactor operators would be 
made more cognizant of the problems which they might encounter because 
of seemingly innocuous modifications of reactor design or operating pro-
cedure. The reactor operators should consider the significance to reactor 
safety of an accumulation of small modifications, periodically reviewing 
the state of the reactor, preferably with an independent evaluation by a 
competent group not associated with the operation of that particular 
reactor. 
In the final analysis, vigilance and deliberateness of action on the 
part of the reactor operators must be stressed. All operating personnel 
should be made fully aware of known potential hazards of any of the oper-
ations which they might be called upon to perform, and the consequences 
of a violation of instructions. No task involving a possible gain in reac-
tivity should ever be considered to be routine. The written, detailed in-
structions for these operations must be clear and unambiguous, and the 
existence of these potential hazards should be stated in boldly evident 
precautionary notes. 


===== PDF PAGE 42 =====
4^ 
o 


===== PDF PAGE 43 =====
APPENDIX A* 
TECHNICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
ARGONNE LOW POWER REACTOR (ALPR) 
(March 9, 1956) 
Note: 
The following characteristics include Change No. 1 
(May 1, 1956), Change No. 2 (June 14, 1956), and in-
terpretation of the specifications ensuing from a 
meeting between Army Reactors Branch and Argonne 
National Laboratory personnel on August 21, 1956. 
The Argonne Low Power Reactor Project (ALPR) has been estab-
lished by the Atomic Energy Commission, at the request of the Department 
of Defense, as an ultimate member of a family of nuclear power plants to 
produce electric power and heat at remote railitary bases. 
The ALPR should be designed to provide the best possible boiling 
heterogeneous nuclear power plant system that meets the requirements of 
an Auxiliary Station, DEW Line, and is compatible with arctic environmental 
conditions. The plant will include the structure housing and auxiliary sys-
tems. The prototype plant will be constructed at the National Reactor 
Testing Station, Idaho. The purpose of prototype construction is to obtain 
information and data on new features of the system, A major objective 
of the prototype design is to minimize the engineering modifications that 
need be made when adapting this design to a specific Auxiliary Station. 
Construction of the prototype power plant system should include as 
many features peculiar to arctic conditions as is possible. For example, 
the air space required between grade and the bottom of the plant structure 
will be provided. Whether such air space is provided in the prototype struc-
ture by placing it on piling, as it must be in the arctic, or by some other 
construction design, may be determined by considerations of local economy. 
Whenever it is necessary to deviate from arctic practices, it is de-
sired that appropriate recommendations be made through the Chicago Oper-
ations Office to the Army Reactors Branch, Division of Reactor Development, 
Washington, D. C. 
These Technical Characterisitcs are to be construed as design ob-
jectives for the prototype plant and not as performance guarantees. 
Changes 
may be made to ensure the design of a simple, reliable nuclear power plant 
Reproduced from Appendix V of Ref. 1: ANL-6076, "Design of the 
Argonne Low Power Reactor (ALPR)," with references deleted. 


===== PDF PAGE 44 =====
for the intended application. Recommendation for changes or modifications 
should be made to the Army Reactors Branch through the Chicago Operations 
Office. 
The DEW Line is now under construction. Specific information on 
loads, load factors, and curves are not available. A specific site for the 
installation of the first operating unit has not been selected. Therefore, for 
many items in this specification, only "average arctic conditions" are given. 
As these and other application information becomes available, data will be 
furnished to Argonne National Laboratory. 
It is desired that, insofar as possible, the materials, components, 
and systems of the nuclear power plant, especially for the reactor compo-
nent, should be acceptance tested under simulated operation conditions be-
fore prototype construction. 
Washington supervision of this project rests in the Army Reactors 
Branch, Division of Reactor Development, U. S. Atomic Energy Commission. 
General Requirements 
1. 
Capacity (Design) 
200 kw Electrical 
400 kw Heat, Net (approximately 1,300,000 Btu/hr) 
2. 
Frequency 
60 cps 
3. 
Voltage (Busbar) 
120/208, 3-phase, 4-wire, wye connected 
4. 
Power Factor 
0.8 
5. 
Plant Factor 
0.7 
6. 
Standby Equipment 
Full capacity, electrical and heating, in conventional diesel-
electric power plants and/or oil-fired furnaces assumed.* 
'The full-capacity electrical requirennent is for an arctic installation. 
The prototype installation was approved with 60-kw diesel-electric. 


===== PDF PAGE 45 =====
7. 
Transportability 
Sealift, airlift, and overland transportation are available in the 
Arctic. Sealift is used only during the summer months, whereas airlift may 
operate the year round. The runways at some DEW Line sites become soft 
during the summer which prevents aircraft operation. 
Aircraft operating to DEW Line stations are C-123 and C-124, 
Details on cargo preparation for these aircraft will be furnished separately.* 
The prototype plant must be designed to incorporate this air transportability 
feature, by components, prior to initial operation. 
8. 
Personnel 
Every man stationed at a remote arctic site increases the logis-
tic support problem for that location. For this reason, the number of operat-
ing personnel to run this plant must be a minimum. It may be assumed that 
certain members of the organization will have some training in the operation 
of this plant to the extent of routine operation, inspections, and preventive 
maintenance. Such training will include basic steam technology, power plant 
operation, parallel operation of generators and instruction in reactor oper-
ation; health physics, nuclear instrumentation, etc. These individuals un-
doubtedly will be utilized in the discharge of the primary mission of the 
remote site. 
The supervisory personnel at this remote site may be expected 
to have very little knowledge of reactor technology. The reliance for un-
interrupted operation is placed upon the technological development of the 
plant components, the plant design and the operating personnel. Thus, a 
nuclear plant that will operate reliably for prolonged periods of time with 
the minimum of supervision and logistic support is required. 
The military personnel assigned to remote arctic stations are 
relieved every 12 months, or less, and replaced by a new group. It should 
be assumed, therefore, the background and training of the incoming per-
sonnel is the bare minimum to satisfactorily accomplish their mission. 
The present plans are to operate the DEW Line by contract. It 
should be assumed the initial operators will be civilians. Major mainte-
nance, fuel changing and radioactive waste disposal will be accomplished by 
especially trained personnel, civilian and/or military. 
The air transportability feature limiited all "packages" to 7-~ ft x 9 ft x 
20 ft, and 20,000 lb in weight. 


===== PDF PAGE 46 =====
9. 
Facilities 
The buildings designed for the Auxiliary Station of the DEW 
Line consist of modules* approximately 16 ft x 28 ft x 16 ft. 
These 
modules are connected in one line so that the ultimate structure is 
28 ft wide and up to 412 ft long, depending on the number of modules used. 
The radar antenna dome is above these modules. Each module, the a s -
sembly, and the radome is designed for winds of 125 mph, 2 in. of ice, and 
30 Ib/ft^ of snow. 
The modules are designed to be compatible with arctic 
conditions: 
(a) 
Comfortable, adequate, and flexible to meet personnel 
and equipment requirements. 
(b) 
Resistant to fire, wind, cold, storm, and deterioration. 
(c) 
Simple and economical to transport, construct, and 
maintain at arctic sites. 
The building design is to emphasize maximum, resistance to, 
prevention of, detection of, and control of fire, consistent with associated 
problem.s of arctic construction, maintenance, operations, economics, and 
logistics. 
The floor of the antenna in the radome over the building train 
is 50 ft above the local terrain. 
The highest point of the building housing 
this power plant should not be higher than 50 ft above ground. Should this 
height be exceeded, the Army Reactors Branch, AEC, should be so informed 
before the design is approved. 
Outside access doors must not be encroached upon by building 
design lest the requisite area for sno\v removal by mechanized equipment 
be hampered. 
The building housing this plant should conform to these general 
DEW Line requirements. 
Operational Requirements 
1. 
Environmental Conditions 
Outside ambient temperature: -60°F to +60°F. The plant should 
be designed for 60 kw electrical overload at 40°F outside ambient air tem-
perature. 
(See No. 4 below.) 
*The module requireinent is for an arctic installation. 
The prefabri-
cated support facilities structure for the prototype was approved. 


===== PDF PAGE 47 =====
Winds: The specifications on the present structures require 
a building to withstand 125-mph gusts, 30 Ib/ft^ of snow, and 2 in. of ice. 
Permafrost: 
Permafrost may be expected throughout the DEW 
Line region. Thawing of the permafrost introduces undesirable stresses in 
the buildings. Adequate protection must be provided to preserve the pernna-
frost regime. Should refrigeration be required, this electrical load must be 
considered parasitic. 
Annual precipitation: The arctic coast, in general, has very 
little precipitation. 
That section of the coast in Alaska proposed for the 
first installation receives approximately 4.5 in./yr. 
Water availability: Many of the DEW Stations have available a 
source of fresh water, other than melted snow. This water may be expected 
to have a high inineral and organic material content. Detailed information 
will be made available at a later date. 
Site materials: Information on this subject is limited. 
Gravel 
has been used at many DEW Line Stations. Detailed information will be 
furnished at a later date.* 
2. 
Routine Operation 
Upon successful completion of acceptance tests, the operational 
nuclear plant is expected to be placed in routine operation. The plant will 
be prepared for operation by an operator in accordance with standard pro-
cedures for starting up the plant. When ready to take the electric and/or 
heating loads, parallel operation with the conventional systems will be e s -
tablished, the load shifted to the nuclear plant, the conventional system 
shut down as prescribed by standard operating procedures. The plant will 
be adjusted to the load conditions and placed into "demand controlled op-
eration" by the operator. When the plant is operating stably and to the 
satisfaction of the operator, further detailed and constant attention by op-
erating personnel should be unnecessary. The operator will be performing 
other duties elsewhere. Routine inspections and preventive maintenance 
(such as keeping oil reservoirs filled) will be necessary. 
Guidance on frequency and extent of inspections and mainte-
nance is expected of Argonne National Laboratory, and the Architect-
Engineer. 
Whenever required and foreseen, the shutdown of the nuclear 
plant will be accomplished manually in accordance with standard operating 
procedures. 
Gravel from a DEW Line Station was examined and appraised as being 
acceptable for biological shield material. 


===== PDF PAGE 48 =====
3. 
Restart 
Normal startups will be under the control of an operator in 
accordance with standard procedures. This action will follow core r e -
placements, scheduled shutdowns, and emergency shutdowns. The nuclear 
plant must be capable of restarting after a shutdown occurring anytime 
during the core life. Plant down time only reintroduces the petroleum 
logistics problem that nuclear plants are to relieve, hence, the need to 
restart at the earliest possible moment. 
4. 
Plant Overload 
This plant must be capable of a 60-kw (electrical) overload 
for a period of one (I) hour or less in each 24-hour cycle. Such a con-
dition may result from the simultaneous utilization of equipment with 
low diversity factor or the energizing of radome heaters. Under this 
condition of operation, the plant must be stable and respond readily and 
automatically to deinand control signals; an operator must not be required 
This overload requirement may be relaxed if a non-standard 
turbine-generator size should be necessary. 
When in this overload condition, the reactor must have suf-
ficient control capability so that for steady operation, or for sudden r e -
duction of load, the reactor will not present any unusual hazard. 
5. 
Stability and Regulation 
The plant must be stable throughout its operating range, which 
is defined as any heating load up to 400 kw plus a net electrical load from 
20 to 260 kw. The maximum load of 260 kw includes a 60-kw overload. 
The following voltage and frequency conditions must be observed; 
(a) 
Voltage inay not vary more than ±5% from the design 
rated value with load varying froin 20 to 260 kw. 
Loads 
may be applied in increments of as much as 60 kw. 
(b) 
Frequency must not vary more than ±5% from the design 
rated value with load varying from 20 to 260 kw. 
(c) 
Voltage may not vary more than ±2% from the steady-
state value at any given load within the operating range. 
(d) 
Frequency may not vary more than ± 0.1 cps from the 
steady-state value at any given load within the operating 
range. 


===== PDF PAGE 49 =====
(e) 
Transient voltages nnay not vary more than ±5% from 
steady-state values. Steady-state voltage must be r e -
established within 5 sec. 
(f) 
Transient frequencies may not vary more than ±0,5 cps 
from steady-state values. Steady-state frequency must 
be re-established within 5 sec. 
If a bypass steam system is utilized to meet the requirennent 
for control and 60-kw load increments, up to approximately 1300 Ib/hr of 
steami may be bypassed from the main steam line through a heat exchanger 
to the condenser. A dead band of approximately 200-300 Ib/hr will be 
allowed to avoid excessive operation of the control system. It must be 
possible to adjust manually the amount of steam which is bypassed. 
The 
bypass steam flow rate naust be re-established within 30 sec. 
The voltage and frequency requirements listed above are dic-
tated by the requirements of the radar-communications equipment at the 
DEW Line Station. The sensitivity of this equipment to frequency and volt-
age changes is being investigated and as detailed data becomes available 
this information will be furnished Argonne National Laboratory. In order 
to provide this high-quality electrical power to the electronics equipment, 
the conventional plant is so arranged that transient-producing utility type 
equipment is isolated from the radar by using (a) separate diesel-
generator(s). Consideration should be given to the isolation of the radar-
communications equipinent load by some suitable arrangement. 
However, 
if this is not feasible, this regulation of voltage and frequency must be 
applied to the full plant load. If the sensitive electronics load can be ef-
fectively isolated, the voltage and frequency regulation for the balance of 
the station load need only conform to current practice of ±5% voltage and 
±2% frequency variations. The characteristics of the nuclear plant must 
be such as to provide for stable parallel operation under all load conditions 
with the conventional diesel-electric equipment now used. 
6. 
Instrumentation 
Instrumentation of the nuclear plant should be a minimum con-
sistent with the safety of the plant and personnel. The prototype of this 
plant may be instrumented as necessary to meet the AEC Advisory Com-
mittee on Reactor Safeguards (ACRS) requirements, but analysis should 
be made and experimentation should be conducted on the prototype to con-
firm the minimum requisite instrumentation. Provision should be made 
for audible warning when hazardous operating conditions are imminent. 
Unless otherwise available, controls and instrumentation 
sufficient for satisfactory parallel operation with the conventional plant 
must be provided. 


===== PDF PAGE 50 =====
The complete control operation - startup, manual and/or 
automatic load changes, parallel operation and shutdown - should be per-
formed from one control panel. All visual and recording instruments of 
the nuclear plant must be available at one location. Duplicate instruments 
may be provided at desired locations. 
Power Plant Components 
1. 
Reactor 
The reactor of the boiling heterogeneous type is to have the 
inherent ability to adjust the power generation, and hence, the stean-i out-
put, to meet the load demand placed upon the power plant. The load de-
mand may be heating or electrical and any combination of the two. The 
reactor must be stable at all reactor power levels from a. "zero power 
critical" condition through a power level equivalent to a plant electrical 
overload of 50% throughout the core life. Provisions must be incornorated 
in the design to provide a sub-critical core at all times during the core or 
fuel assembly replacement operation and the subsequent cooling period. 
Minimum mechanical equipment should be within the biological 
shield of the reactor. 
Components with rotating or movable parts should 
be readily available for inspection and maintenance. 
Unless the reactor design is adequate to accommodate the dis-
sipation of heat after shutdown, cooling must be provided, including the 
cooling of spent cores in storage, if necessary. 
2. 
Component Contamination 
The conceptual design places the turbine in the primary loop 
and outside of the biological shield. 
This planning requires maximum water 
purity, miniinum entrainment of radioactive particles in the steam, high 
fuel plate integrity, and a system, for the detection of excessive radioactivitv 
in the primary loop. 
3. 
Core Life 
The life of the reactor core must be at least two (2) years at 
full design load. It is expected that fuel changes will be niade every three (3) 
years. 
The fuel plates must withstand the etfects of burnup, corro.sion, 
erosion, heat generation, and retain the fission products for these periods * 
*Since there was insufficient operating experience with aluminum-
type X8001-clad fuel plates in a boiling water reactor, a firm guar-
antee of a 3-year core life could not be provided 
The Army Reactoi s 
Branch was made cognizant of this fact earlv m the design phases ol 
the program. An effort has been made to lengthen the operational life 
of the fuel plate by increasing the cladding thickness, and b\ using 
Al-Ni-U fuel plate "meat" that is almost as corrosion resistant in 
boiling water as the cladding material. 
It is believed that at the 
present (February 5, 1959) operating conditions oi the reactor, the 
assemblies of fuel plates should fulfill the design goal of core life 


===== PDF PAGE 51 =====
This requirement is necessary to hold down the logistic support of this 
plant and to minimize the time required to reach the point of more eco -
nomic operation than by conventional plants. The plant down time for any 
reason must be a minimum in order to keep the petroleum consumption 
low. 
4. 
Shielding 
The shielding of the reactor component represents the great-
est single volume of the plant, and emphasis should be placed upon real-
izing the smallest volume and weight of shield necessary.* 
On the other hand, personnel at the reinote site must not be 
exposed to a radiation dose in excess of 50 inr/V-day week. In the shield 
design, consideration may be given to the use of exclusion areas and/or 
shadow shielding, provided the above maximum dose rate is not exceeded. 
The personnel safety criteria for shielding the reactor apply to the shield-
ing of the spent fuel storage pit. 
5. 
Fuel Storage 
Fuel storage for spent fuel assemblies of one core must be 
provided. The time spent in "cooling" is subject to economic evaluation. 
It may be assuined that a spent core will cool for one year, and possibly 
for one core life. Adequate safety provisions must be incorporated to 
inaintain the spent fuel in a subcritical condition at all times during 
storage. 
The fuel storage chamber should be so designed and situated 
with respect to the reactor and the power plant that removal of the spent 
assemblies is facilitated and the "cooling off" does not interfere with the 
operation and maintenance of the plant. 
'The shielding criteria were based upon the necessity to transport all 
shield materials by air. The use of locally available gravel for shield-
ing relaxed the requirement. 


===== PDF PAGE 52 =====
REFERENCES 
E. E. Hamer (ed.), "Design of the Argonne Low Power Reactor 
(ALPR)," ANL-6076 (May 1961). 
Ibid, Appendix V, pp. 257-265. 
"Statements to the SL-1 Board of Investigation by Combustion Engi-
neering, Inc., and Argonne National Laboratory on the SL-1 Accident," 
IDO-19312 (August 1962). 
D. H. Shaftman, "Zero-Power Experiments on the Argonne Low Power 
Reactor," ANL-6078 (May 1961). 
E. E. Hamier (ed,), "Initial Testing and Operation of the Argonne Low 
Power Reactor (ALPR)," ANL-6084 (December 1959), pp. 101-125 and 
157-160. 
Ibid, pp. 147-156. 
"SL-1 Reactor Accident on January 3, 1961, Interim Report," 
IDO-19300 (May 1961). 
"Final Report on the SL-1 Incident, January 3, 1961," (Attachment 
with USAEC Release of Information for P r e s s and Radio No. E-326, 
Washington, D. C , September 24, 1962). 
"Final Report of SL-1 Recovery Operation, May 1961 through July 
1962," IDO-19311 (July 1962). 
Personal Communication from G. G. Plastino; SL-1 Project; Nuclear 
Materials and Propulsion Operation, General Electric Company, Idaho, 
Letter from SL-1 Board of Investigation Chairman C. A. Nelson to 
A. R. Luedecke, September 5, 1962, Subject: Final Report of the 
SL-1 Board of Investigation. (Attachment with USAEC Release of 
Information for P r e s s and Radio No. E-326, Washington, D. C , 
September 24, 1962). 
Ibid, Ref. 4, Appendix B. 
Ibid, Ref. 4, Appendix C. 
Ibid, Ref. 1, p. 216. 
"Phase III Design Analysis for the Army Package Power Reactor, 
Volume I - Design Analysis," APAE-10 (Vol. I), (August 1956). 


===== PDF PAGE 53 =====
16. 
"Control Rod Drive Development," APAE-Memo-106 (1957). 
17. 
"APPR-1; Design, Construction and Operation," APAE-23 (November 
1957). 
18. 
M. Treshow, "ALPR Preliminary Design Study (Argonne Low Power 
Reactor) Phase I," ANL-5566 (April 1956), p. 9. 
19. 
Ibid, Ref. 1, p. 215. 
20. 
Ibid, Ref. 4, Fig. 31. 
21. 
Ibid, Ref. 7, Figs. 34 and 35, 
22. 
Ibid, Ref. 9, p. III-107. 
23. 
Ibid, Ref. 7, p. 57. 
24. 
Ibid, Ref, 7, Fig. 30. 
25. 
Ibid, Ref. 7, pp. 30-32. 
26. 
Ibid, Ref. 7, pp. 32-33, 
27. 
Personal Communication fromi S, Greenberg, Metallurgy Division, 
Argonne National Laboratory. 
28. 
J. Kozol, D. E. Nulk, and W. P. Chernock, "Evaluation of SL-1 
Poison Strips," IDO-19032 (August 1961). 
29. 
Ibid, Ref, 7, p. 61. 
30. 
Ibid, Ref. 7, p. 63. 
31. 
Ibid, Ref. 7, Appendix A, pp. A-1, A-2. 
32. 
Ibid, Ref, 7, p. 67. 
33. 
M. Treshow, A. R. Snider, and D. H. Shaftman, "Design Study of a 
Nuclear Power Plant for 100-kw Electric and 400-kw Heat Capacity," 
ANL-5452 (May 1955). 
34. 
A. Radkowski, "Theory and Application of Burnable Poisons," p / l 9 0 0 . 
Proceedings of the Second United Nations International Conference on 
the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, Geneva (1958), Vol. 13, 
pp. 426-445. 


===== PDF PAGE 54 =====
35. 
H. Hurwitz, Jr., and P. F. Zweifel, "Self-Shielding of Lumped-Poison 
Mixtures," Nuclear Science and Engineering, 1, 5 (October 1956), 
pp. 438-440. 
~ 
36. 
Personal Communication from S. Greenberg and D. E. Walker, 
Metallurgy Division, Argonne National Laboratory. 
37. 
C. R. Breden, W. S. Brown, and M. Sivetz, "Soluble Poisons in Re-
actor Control," ANL-5244 (November 1955). 
38. 
J. A, Thie, "Fluid Poison Control of Boiling Water Reactors," 
Nucleonics, 
j ^ , 
5 (May 1958), pp. 82-83. 
39. 
Ibid, Ref. 5, p. 198. 
40. 
"Yankee Nuclear Power Station Technical Information and Final 
Hazards Summary Report, " YAEC-167, Vols. 1 and 2 (l959), 
pp. 103-108. 
41. 
A. E. G. Bates, "Control Rods and Control-Rod Drives in Power 
Reactors," Nuclear Safety, _2^, 4 (June 196l), pp. 17-37, 
42. 
A. Smiaardyk (ed.), "Hazard Sumimary Report on the Argonne Low 
Power Reactor (ALPR)," ANL-5744 (October 1957), p. 13. 
